Structure 95

Section of the diffraction
pattern generated by the
poliovirus crystal.

X-ray
source

   

 

Computerized
detector

   

poliovirus crystal

Figure 4.4 Determination of virus structure by X-ray diffraction. This method requires crystallization of the sample of interest, such as a
virus particle. The conditions under which a supersaturated solution of a protein or virus particles will form crystals suitable for X-ray diffraction,
while retaining its native structure, cannot be predicted. Consequently, highly concentrated and purified virus particles are incubated under many
different conditions, varying such parameters as concentrations of salt or metal ions, the presence of other polymers, and temperature. This empir-
ical approach has been facilitated by the development of crystallization screening kits and robotic devices to set up crystallization trials. Neverthe-
less, it can be time-consuming, and success is not guaranteed. A virus crystal is composed of virus particles arranged in a well-ordered three-dimensional
lattice. When the crystal is bombarded with a monochromatic X-ray beam traveling through the pinhole, each atom within the virus particle scat-
ters the radiation. Interactions of the scattered rays with one another form a diffraction pattern that is recorded. Each spot contains information
about the position and the identity of the atoms in the crystal. The locations and intensities of the spots are stored electronically. Determination of
the three-dimensional structure of the virus from the diffraction pattern requires information that is lost in the X-ray diffraction experiment needed
for calculating the positions of the atoms. The diffraction pattern collected from the crystal is now most usually interpreted by using the phases from
the structure of a related molecule as a starting point, and subsequently applying computer algorithms to calculate the actual values of the phases.
‘This method is known as molecular replacement. Once the phases are known, the intensities and spot positions from the diffraction pattern are

used to calculate the locations of the atoms within the crystal.

first high-resolution virus structure determined was that of
tomato bushy stunt virus. Since this feat was accomplished in
1978, high-resolution structures of increasingly large animal
viruses have been determined, placing our understanding of
the principles of capsid architecture on a firm foundation.

Not all viruses can be examined directly by X-ray crystal-
lography: some do not form suitable crystals, and the larger
viruses lie beyond the power of the current procedures by
which X-ray diffraction spots are converted into a structural
model. However, their architectures can be determined by
using a combination of structural methods. Individual viral
proteins can be examined by X-ray crystallography and by
multidimensional nuclear magnetic resonance techniques.
‘The latter methods, which allow structural models to be con-
structed from knowledge of the distances between specific
atoms in a polypeptide chain, can be applied to proteins in
solution, a significant advantage.

High-resolution structures of individual proteins have been
particularly important in deciphering mechanisms of attach-
ment and entry of enveloped viruses. Even more valuable are
methods in which high-resolution structures of individual
viral proteins are combined with cryo-EM reconstructions of
intact virus particles. For example, in difference imaging, the
structures of individual proteins are in essence subtracted
from the reconstruction of the particle to yield new structural
insights (Fig. 4.5). This powerful approach has provided fas-
cinating views of interactions of viral envelope proteins embed-

ded in lipid bilayers and of internal surfaces and components
of virus particles.

Atomic-resolution structures of individual proteins or do-
mains can also be modeled into lower-resolution views (cur-
rently ~15 A) obtained by small-angle X-ray scattering. This
technique, which is applied to proteins in solution, provides
information about the overall size and shape of flexible,
asymmetric proteins, and has provided valuable information
about viral proteins with multiple functional domains (see
Chapter 10). It can also reveal dynamic properties, such as
conformational change, a property shared with serial femto-
second X-ray crystallography, in which as many as hundreds
of thousands of images of small crystals are recorded in a
very short time.

Building a Protective Coat

Regardless of their size and architectural sophistication, all
virions contain at least one protein coat, the capsid or nucle-
ocapsid, which encases and protects the nucleic acid genome
(Table 4.2). As first pointed out by Francis Crick and James
Watson in 1956, most virus particles appear to be rod shaped
or spherical under the electron microscope. Because the cod-
ing capacities of viral genomes known at that time were very
limited, these authors proposed that construction of capsids
from a small number of subunits would minimize the genetic
cost of encoding structural proteins. Such genetic economy
dictates that capsids be built from identical copies of a small
