Structure 99

Figure 4.7 Structure of a ribonucleoprotein-like complex of vesicular stoma-
titis virus. Shown is the structure of a decamer of the N protein bound to RNA, deter-
mined by X-ray crystallography, with alternating monomers in the ring colored red and
blue and the RNA ribose-phosphate backbone depicted as a green tube. To allow visuali-
zation of the RNA, the C-terminal domain of the monomer at the top center is not shown.
‘The decamer was isolated by dissociation of the viral P protein from RNA-bound oligo-
mers formed when the N and P proteins were synthesized in Escherichia coli. Although
considerably smaller than N-RNA rings in the virus particles, this structure revealed
how N protein molecules interact with the RNA genome and with one another. For ex-
ample, the N-terminal extension and the extended loop in the C-terminal lobe contribute
to the extensive interactions among neighboring N monomers. Adapted from Green TJ et
al. 2006. Science 313:357-360, with permission. Courtesy of M. Luo, University of Ala-
bama at Birmingham.

 

Terminal
NP loop

\

RNA polymerase

 

Figure 4.8 Structure of an influenza A virus ribonucleoprotein. (A) (Left) Ribonucleoproteins (RNPs) were isolated from purified influenza
A virus particles and examined by scanning transmission EM tomography. Shown is a single RNP segment, with the NP loops indicated by arrow-
heads: most RNPs have the viral RNA polymerase bound at the end opposite the NP loop. Scale bar, 50 nm. Adapted from Sugita Y et al. 2013. J Virol
87:12879-12884. Courtesy of Y. Kawoaka, University of Tokyo, Japan. (Right) Central and terminal regions of purified RNPs were analyzed separately
following cryo-EM. This procedure was adopted to overcome the heterogeneity in length of individual RNPs and their flexibility. Class averaging of
images of straight segments of central regions and three-dimensional reconstruction revealed that the RNA-binding NP protein forms a double helix
closed by a loop at one end. The likely localization of the (-) strand genome RNA (yellow ribbon) was deduced from the surface electrostatic potential
(left, with positive and negative charge shown in blue and red, respectively) and the positions of substitutions that impair binding of NP to RNA (blue
in the model on the right). Reprinted from Arranz R et al. 2012. Science 338:1634-1637, with permission. Courtesy of J. Martin-Benito, Centro Nacio-
nal de Biotecnologia, Madrid, Spain. (B) Non-uniform association of (-) strand RNA segments with the NP double helix is illustrated schematically,
with the NP strands of opposite polarity shown in pale and dark tan; the RNA polymerase subunits at the other end in green, pink, and yellow; and
the RNA shown in green. This mode of association, in which G-rich sequences in each RNA genome segment are more tightly bound, was deduced
from high-throughput sequencing of RNA fragments bound to RNPs isolated by immunoprecipitation following UV cross-linking of influenza A vi-
rus particles and limited RNase digestion of viral lysates. Adapted from Lee N et al. 2017. Nucleic Acids Res 45:8968-8977, with permission.

Exceptionally large examples include the (+) strand RNA virus
potato virus Y, up to 900 nm in length, and bacterial inovi-
ruses, some twice as long, that contain single-stranded DNA
genomes, Nevertheless, helical viruses are limited in size. Be-
cause helical structures are “open,” some property other than
symmetry must limit the size of helical viruses, perhaps the
nature of their genomes (see Chapter 3) or susceptibility to
shear forces.

Capsids with Icosahedral Symmetry

General Principles

Icosahedral symmetry. Platonic solids are symmetrical
forms in which each face is the same regular polygon and the
same number of faces meet at each vertex. An icosahedron
contains the largest number of faces (20), and 12 vertices re-
lated by two-, three-, and fivefold axes of rotational symmetry
