Table 4.2 Nomenclature used in description of virus structure

Term Synonym _ Definition

Subunit (protein Single, folded polypeptide chain
subunit)

Structural unit Asymmetric_—_Unit from which capsids or

unit nucleocapsids are built; may
comprise one protein subunit or
multiple, different protein subunits
Capsid Coat ‘The protein shell surrounding the
nucleic acid genome
‘The nucleic acid-protein assembly
packaged within the virion; used
when this assembly is a discrete
substructure of a particle
‘The host cell-derived lipid bilayer
carrying viral glycoproteins

Nucleocapsid Core

Viral
membrane

Envelope

Virion ‘The infectious virus particle

 

1940s, traditionally relied on staining of purified virus parti-
cles (or of sections of infected cells) with an electron-dense
material. It can yield quite detailed and often beautiful images
(Fig. 1.9; see the Appendix) and provided the first rational ba-
sis for classification of viruses.

The greatest contrast between virus particle and stain (neg-
ative contrast) occurs where portions of the folded protein
chain protrude from the surface. Consequently, surface knobs
or projections, termed morphological units, are the main fea-
tures identified by this method. However, because these sur-
face features are often formed by multiple proteins, their
organization does not necessarily correspond to that of the
individual proteins that make up the capsid shell. Even when

Structure 93

structure is well preserved and a high degree of contrast can
be achieved, the minimal size of an object that can be distin-
guished by classical electron microscopy, its resolution, is
limited to 50 to 75 A. This resolution is far too poor to permit
molecular interpretation: for example, the diameter of an o-
helix in a protein is on the order of 10 A. Cryo-electron mi-
croscopy (cryo-EM), in which samples are rapidly frozen and
examined at very low temperatures in a hydrated, vitrified
(noncrystalline, glass-like) state, preserves native structure.
Because samples are not stained, this technique allows direct
visualization of the contrast inherent to the virus particle, and
it also enables higher resolution.

‘The symmetry of most virus particles facilitates analysis
of individual images obtained by cryo-EM for reconstruc-
tion of two- or three-dimensional structure (Box 4.1). This
approach can be complemented by cryo-electron tomogra-
phy, in which two-dimensional images are recorded as the
vitrified sample is tilted at different angles to the electron
beam and subsequently combined into a three-dimensional
density map (Fig. 4.3). These methods have been greatly
improved since their introduction, to near atomic-level res-
olution, and are now standard tools of structural biology.
‘Their application has provided unprecedented views of vi-
rus particles not amenable to other methods of structural
analysis, for example, alphaviruses (Fig. 4.23) and herpes-
viruses (Fig. 4.27).

‘The first descriptions of the molecular interactions that
dictate the structure of virus particles were obtained by X-ray
crystallography (Fig. 4.4) (see the interview with Dr. Michael
Rossmann: http://bit.ly/Virology_Rossmann). A plant virus
(tobacco mosaic virus) was the first to be crystallized, and the

BOX 4.1
METHODS

The development of cryo-electron microscopy, a revolution

in structural biology

Cryo-EM has now revealed near-atomic reso-
lution of not only symmetric virus particles,
some very large, but also asymmetric and dy-
namic cellular machines built from many
components, such as transcription complexes
and the spliceosome. The foundations for this
revolutionary method of structural biology
were laid in the 1970s and 1980s by Jacques
Dubochet, Joachim Frank, and Richard Hen-
derson, whose contributions were recognized
by the 2017 Nobel Prize in Chemistry.
Henderson was the first to use electron mi-
croscopy to investigate the structure of a pro-
tein (bacteriorhodopsin in a cell membrane),
and obtained a low-resolution model. The de-

velopment by Frank of algorithms for the sort-
ing of randomly oriented molecules into related
groups for averaging improved the resolution
of two-dimensional images and facilitated their
transformation into three-dimensional struc-
tural models (Fig. 4.3). Further increases in
resolution were achieved when Dubochet per-
fected methods for vitrification of samples to
produce much sharper images.

Near-atomic resolution, which is now quite
routine, was attained with additional refine-
ments, including the use of direct electron de-
tectors (rather than film or CCD cameras) to
capture images and increasingly sophisticated
data processing software.

 

The composite image of cryo-EM reconstruc-
tions of the enzyme f-galactosidase drama-
tizes the great improvement in resolution,
from the 10 to 20 A typical a decade ago to, in
this case, 2.2 A (left to right). Courtesy of
Sriram Subramanian, National Cancer Institute.
