92 Chapter 4

 

Figure 4.1 Variation in the size and shape of virus particles.
(A) Cryo-electron micrographs of mimivirus and, in the inset (upper
left), the parvovirus adeno-associated virus type 4, shown to scale rela-
tive to one another to illustrate the ~50-fold range in diameter among
viruses that appear roughly spherical. The mimivirus particle (A) is
structurally complex: a large number of long, closely packed filaments
project from its surface; and one vertex of the capsid carries a unique
structure called the stargate, which opens in infected cells to release the
viral genome. Rod-shaped viruses also exhibit considerable variation in
size, ranging in length from <200 nm to ~2,000 nm. Photos reprinted from.
Xiao C etal. 2005. J Mol Biol 353:493-496, and Pardon E etal. 2005. J Virol
79:5047-5058, respectively, with permission. Courtesy of Y. Mustafi,
National Institutes of Health, and M. Agbandje-McKenna, University
of Florida, Gainesville. (B) Nonsymmetric shape of Acidianus bottle-
shaped virus isolated from a hot spring in Italy. Adapted from Haring M
et al. 2005. J Virol 79:9904-9911, with permission. Courtesy of D.
Prangishvili, Institut Pasteur.

Table 4.1 Functions of virion proteins

Protection of the genome

‘Assembly of a stable protective protein shell

Specific recognition and packaging of the nucleic acid genome
Interaction with host cell membranes to form the envelope
Delivery of the genome

Binding to external receptors of the host cell

Transmission of signals that induce uncoating of the genome
Induction of fusion with host cell membranes

Interaction with internal components of the infected cell to direct
transport of the genome to the appropriate site

Other functions

Interactions with cellular components for transport to intracellular sites of
assembly

Interactions with cellular components to ensure an efficient infectious cycle

 

unfavorable energy barrier has been surmounted, following
induction of the irreversible conformational transitions that
are associated with attachment and entry. Virions are not
simply inert entities. Rather, they are molecular machines
(nanomachines) that play an active role in delivery of the nu-

 

 

Figure 4.2 Free energy changes in virus particles. Mature virus
particles occupy a free energy minimum (1); that is, they are stable, but
have not attained the structure with the lowest free energy. Rather, they
are primed during assembly and maturation to undergo irreversible
conformational transitions (2) that overcome the energy barrier to that
lower (more favorable) free energy state (3), and to disassemble at least
partially. Such transitions are typically triggered by contact with a host
cell receptor or coreceptor or such changes in the environment as a
drop in pH. G, free energy; X, reaction coordinate (for example, time
after addition of virus particles to susceptible host cells).

cleic acid genome to the appropriate host cell and initiation of
the reproductive cycle.

‘As might be anticipated, elucidation of the structures of vi-
rus particles and individual structural proteins has illuminated
the mechanisms of both assembly of viral nanomachines in the
final stages of an infectious cycle and their entry into a new host
cell. High-resolution structural information can also facilitate
identification of targets for antiviral drugs, as well as the design
of such drugs (Volume II, Chapter 8), and provide insights into
the dynamic interplay between important viral pathogens and
host adaptive immune responses (Volume II, Chapter 4). As we
shall see, cataloguing of virus architecture has also revealed
completely unanticipated relationships among viruses of differ-
ent families that infect evolutionarily divergent hosts, and has
suggested new principles of virus classification.

Nomenclature

Virus architecture is described in terms of structural units
of increasing complexity, from the smallest biochemical unit
(the polypeptide chain) to the infectious particle (or virion).
These terms, which are used throughout this text, are defined
in Table 4.2. Although virus particles are ordered assemblies
of macromolecules exquisitely suited for protection and deliv-
ery of viral genomes, they are constructed according to the
general principles of biochemistry and protein structure.

Methods for Studying Virus Structure

Electron microscopy is the most widely used method for the
examination of structure and morphology of virus particles.
‘This technique, which has been applied to viruses since the
