Scanned micrograph

 

Boxed

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  
 
  

Fourier
transform

J

Determine phase centers
and orientations

 

Merged transform Refine

 

| Inverse Fourier transform

   

3D reconstruction

 

 

Concentrated preparations of purified virus particles are prepared for
cryo-electron microscopy by rapid freezing on an electron
microscope grid so that a glasslike, noncrystalline water layer is
produced. This procedure avoids sample damage that can be caused
by crystallization of the water or by chemical modification or
dehydration during conventional _ negative-contrast electron
microscopy. The sample is maintained at or below —160°C during all
subsequent operations. Fields containing sufficient numbers of
vitrified virus particles are identified by transmission electron
microscopy at low magnification (to minimize sample damage from
the electron beam) and photographed at high resolution (top).

These electron micrographs can be treated as two-dimensional
projections (Fourier transforms) of the particles. Three-dimensional
structures can be reconstructed from such two-dimensional
projections by mathematically combining the information included
in different views of the particles. For the purpose of reconstruction,
the images of different particles are treated as different views of the
same structure.

For reconstruction, micrographs are digitized for computer
processing. Each particle to be analyzed is then centered inside a box,
and its orientation is determined by application of programs that
orient the particle on the basis of its icosahedral symmetry. In
cryo-electron tomography, images are collected with the sample at
different angles to the electron beam and combined computationally
to reconstruct a three-dimensional structure. The advantage of this
approach is that no assumptions about the symmetry of the structure
are required. The parameters that define the orientation of the particle
must be determined with a high degree of accuracy, for example, to
within 1° for even a low-resolution reconstruction (~40 A).

Once the orientations of a number of particles sufficient to represent
all parts of the asymmetric unit have been determined, a
low-resolution three-dimensional reconstruction is calculated from
the initial set of two-dimensional projections by using computational
methods.

This reconstruction is refined by including data from additional views
(particles). The number of views required depends on the size of the
particle and the resolution sought. The reconstruction is initially
interpreted in terms of the external features of the virus particle.
Various computational and computer graphics procedures have been
developed to facilitate interpretation of internal features. Courtesy of
B.WN. Prasad, Baylor College of Medicine.

And is it not true that even the small step of a glimpse through the
microscope reveals to us images that we should deem fantastic and
over-imaginative if we were to see them somewhere accidentally, and
lacked the sense to understand them.

Paul Klee, On Modern Art, translated by Paul Findlay (London,
United Kingdom, 1948)

jure 4.3 Cryo-EM and image reconstruction illustrated with rotavirus.
