In order to create something that functions properly—a con-
tainer, a chair, a house—its essence has to be explored, for
it should serve its purpose to perfection; i.e., it should fulfill
its function practically and should be durable, inexpensive
and beautiful.

WALTER Gropius
Neue Arbeiten der Bauhauswerkstiitten,
Bauhaus Book no. 7, 1925

Introduction

Virus particles are elegant assemblies of viral, and occasion-
ally cellular, macromolecules. They are marvelous examples
of architecture on the molecular scale, with forms perfectly
adapted to their functions. Virus particles come in many sizes
and shapes (Fig. 4.1; also see Fig. 1.7) and vary enormously in
the number and nature of the molecules from which they are
built. Nevertheless, they fulfill common functions and are
constructed according to general principles that apply to them
all. These properties are described in subsequent sections,
which include examples of the architectural detail character-
istic of members of different virus families, and nonstructural
components of virus particles needed for initiation of infec-
tious cycles.

Functions of the Virion

Virus particles have been selected during evolution for effec-
tive transmission of the nucleic acid genome from one host
cell to another within a single organism or among host organ-
isms (Table 4.1). A primary function of an infectious virus
particle (called the virion) is protection of the genome, which
can be damaged irreversibly by a break in the nucleic acid or
by mutation during passage through hostile environments.
During its travels, a virus particle may encounter a variety of
potentially lethal chemical and physical agents, including
proteolytic and nucleolytic enzymes; extremes of pH, humid-
ity, or temperature; and various forms of natural radiation. In
all virus particles, the nucleic acid is sequestered within a
sturdy barrier formed by extensive interactions among the vi-
ral proteins that comprise the protein coat. Such protein-

protein interactions can maintain surprisingly stable capsids:
many virus particles composed of only protein and nucleic
acid survive exposure to large variations in the temperature,
pH, or chemical composition of their environment. For exam-
ple, when dried onto a solid surface, human rotavirus (a ma-
jor cause of gastroenteritis) loses <20% of its infectivity in
30 days at room temperature, whereas the infectivity of polio-
virus (a picornavirus) is reduced by some 5 orders of magnitude
within 2 days. This same reduction in infectivity of poliovi-
rus requires >250 days when particles suspended in water are
incubated at room temperature at neutral pH. Certain picor-
naviruses are even resistant to very strong detergents. The
highly folded nature of coat proteins and their dense packing
to form shells render them largely inaccessible to proteolytic
enzymes. Some viruses also possess an envelope, typically
derived from cellular membranes, into which viral glycopro-
teins have been inserted. The envelope adds not only a protec-
tive lipid membrane but also an external layer of protein and
sugars formed by the glycoproteins. Like the cellular mem-
branes from which they are derived, viral envelopes are im-
permeable to many molecules and block entry of chemicals or
enzymes in aqueous solution.

To protect the nucleic acid genome, virus particles must be
stable. However, they must also attach to an appropriate host
cell and deliver the genome to the interior of that cell, where
the particle is at least partially disassembled. The protective
function of virus particles depends on stable intermolecular
interactions among their components during assembly,
egress from the virus-producing cell, and transmission. On
the other hand, these interactions must be reversed readily
during entry and uncoating in a new host cell. In only a few
cases do we understand the molecular mechanisms by which
these apparently paradoxical requirements are met. Never-
theless, it is clear that contact of a virion with the appropriate
cell surface receptor or exposure to a specific intracellular en-
vironment can trigger substantial conformational changes.
Virus particles are therefore metastable assemblies that
have not yet attained the minimum free energy conforma-
tion (Fig. 4.2). The latter state can be attained only once an

 

91
