Structure 97

 

METHODS
Nanoconstruction with virus particles

Nanochemistry is the synthesis and study of A
well-defined structures with dimensions of 1
to 100 nm. Molecular biologists study nano-
chemistry, nanostructures, and molecular
machines including the ribosome and mem-
brane-bound signaling complexes. Icosahedral
viruses are proving to be precision building
blocks for nanochemistry. The icosahedral
cowpea mosaic virus particle is 30 nm in di-
ameter, and its atomic structure is known.
Grams of particles can be prepared easily from
kilograms of infected leaves, insertional muta-
genesis is straightforward, and precise amino
acid changes can be introduced. As illustrated
in panel A of the figure, cysteine residues in-
serted in the capsid protein provide functional
groups for chemical attachment of 60 precisely
placed molecules, in this case, gold particles.
High local concentrations of attached
chemical agents, coupled with precise place-
ment, and the propensity of virus-like particles
for self-organization into two- and three-di-

 

 

Gold particles attached to cowpea mosaic virus. (A) Cryo-EM was performed on derivatized cow-
pea mosaic virus with a cysteine residue inserted on the surface of each of the 60 subunits and to which
nanogold particles with a diameter of 1.4 nm were chemically linked. (Left) Difference electron density
map obtained by subtracting the density of unaltered cowpea mosaic virus at 29 A from the density map
of the derivatized virus. This procedure reveals both the genome (green) and the gold nanoparticles.
(Right) A section of the difference map imposed on the atomic model of cowpea mosaic virus. The posi-
tions of the gold indicate that it is attached at the sites of the introduced cysteine residues. Courtesy of
M.. Finn and J. Johnson, The Scripps Research Institute. (B) Increasing the piezoelectric strength of
phage M13. Schematic side view of a segment of M13 containing 10 copies (3 of which are shown) of the
helical major coat protein modified to contain four glutamine residues at its N terminus. The dipole mo-
ments (yellow arrows) are directed from the N terminus (blue, positive) to the C terminus (red, negative).

mensional lattices of well-ordered arrays of
particles enable rather remarkable nanocon-
struction. For example, the surface of the fila-
mentous bacteriophage M13 can be patterned
to carry separate binding sites for gold and
cobalt oxide and assembled into nanowires to
form the anodes of small lithium ion batter-
ies. Remarkably, this bacteriophage also dis-
plays intrinsic piezoelectric properties, that
is, the ability to generate an electric charge in
response to mechanical deformation, and vice
versa. The basis of this property is not fully
understood, but modification of the sequence
of the major protein to increase its dipole

moment (figure, panel B) augmented the
piezoelectric strength of the bacteriophage.
Assembly of the modified M13 into thin films
was exploited to build a piezoelectric genera-
tor that produced up to 6 mA of current and
400 mV of potential, sufficient to operate a
liquid crystal display (see Movie 4.1: http://
bity/Virology_piezo). Virus particles also
have considerable potential for the delivery of
drugs and other medically relevant molecules
(Volume IT, Chapter 9).

Viruses are not just for infections anymore!
They will provide a rich source of building
blocks for applications spanning the worlds

of molecular biology, materials science, and
medicine.

Lee BY, Zhang J, Zueger C, Chung WJ, Yoo SY,
Wang E, Meyer J, Ramesh R, Lee SW. 2012. Virus-
based piezoelectric energy generation. Nat Nano-
technol 7:351-356.

Nam KT, Kim DW, Yoo PJ, Chiang CY, Meethong N,
Hammond PT, Chiang YM, Belcher AM. 2006. Vi-
rus-enabled synthesis and assembly of nanowires for
lithium ion battery electrodes. Science 312:885-888.

Tarascon JM. 2009. Nanomaterials: viruses electrify
battery research. Nat Nanotechnol 4:341-342,

Wang Q, Lin T, Tang L, Johnson JE, Finn MG. 2002.
Icosahedral virus particles as addressable nanoscale
building blocks. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl 41:459-462.

become highly extended and filamentous once the matrix (M)
protein is also removed (Fig. 12.21). X-ray crystallography of a
ring-like N protein-RNA complex containing 10 molecules of
the protein bound to RNA has revealed that each N protein
molecule binds to 9 nucleotides of the RNA that is largely se-
questered within cavities formed by the protein (Fig. 4.7).
Furthermore, each N subunit makes extensive and regular
contacts with neighboring N molecules, as predicted from
first principles by Crick and Watson.

‘The internal components of influenza A virus particles
differ radically: they comprise not a single nucleocapsid but
multiple ribonucleoproteins, one for each of the 8 molecules
of the segmented RNA genome present in an infectious virus
particle (Appendix, Fig. 15). Furthermore, with the exception

of terminal sequences, the RNA in these ribonucleoproteins
is fully accessible to solvent, suggesting that the RNA is not
sequestered in the interior of the ribonucleoprotein. The ar-
chitectures of ribonucleoproteins released from influenza A
virus particles determined by cryo-EM or scanning trans-
mission EM tomography are consistent with such a model:
the ribonucleoprotein comprises a double helix of NP mole-
cules connected at one end by an NP loop, often with a mole-
cule of the viral RNA polymerase bound at the other end
(Fig. 4.8A). The RNA is bound along the exposed surfaces of
the NP strands with some sequences in each RNA segment
more tightly associated than others (Fig. 4.8B).

‘The examples presented above illustrate the diversity possible
when viruses with simple helical symmetry possess an envelope.
