96 Chapter 4

  

Cryo-EM density

Trimeric
density

a-helical
bundle

 

Figure 4.5 Difference mapping illustrated by a 6-A-resolution
reconstruction of adenovirus. (A) Comparison of a-helices of the
penton base in the cryo-electron microscopic (cryo-EM) density (gray
mesh) and the crystal structure of this protein bound to a fiber peptide
(ribbon). The excellent agreement established that o.-helices could be
reliably discerned in the 6-A cryo-EM reconstruction. (B) Portion of
the cryo-EM difference map corresponding to the surface of one icosa-
hedral face of the capsid. The crystal structures of the penton base
(yellow) and the hexons (green, cyan, blue, and magenta at different
positions) at appropriate resolution were docked within the cryo-EM.
density at 6-A resolution. The cryo-EM density that does not corre-
spond to these structural units (the difference map) is shown in red. At
this resolution, the difference map revealed four trimeric structures lo-
cated between neighboring hexons and three bundles of coiled-coiled
a-helices. Both assemblies are now known to be formed by cement pro-
tein IX. Adapted from Saban SD et al. 2006. J Virol 80:12049-12059,
with permission. Courtesy of Phoebe Stewart, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center.

number of viral proteins with properties that permit regular
and repetitive interactions among them. These protein mole-
cules are arranged to provide maximal contact and noncova-
lent bonding among subunits and structural units. We now
know that the capsids of even the largest viruses, with ge-
nomes of >1 Mbp, are also built from a small number of pro-
teins. This property indicates that optimization of regular
protein-protein interactions is the primary determinant of
virus architecture. The repetition of such interactions among

a limited number of proteins results in a regular structure,
with symmetry that is determined by the spatial patterns of
the interactions. The helical or icosahedral symmetry com-
mon to many viruses not only satisfies such protein limita-
tions but also has considerable practical value (Box 4.2).

Helical Structures

‘The nucleocapsids of some enveloped animal viruses, as well
as certain plant viruses and bacteriophages, are rod-like or
filamentous structures with helical symmetry. Helical sym-
metry is described by the number of structural units per turn
of the helix, the axial rise per unit, and the pitch of the helix
(Fig. 4.6A). A characteristic feature of a helical structure is
that any volume can be enclosed simply by varying the length
of the helix. Such a structure is said to be open. In contrast,
capsids with icosahedral symmetry (described below) are
closed structures with fixed internal volume.

From a structural point of view, the best-understood heli-
cal nucleocapsid is that of tobacco mosaic virus, the very first
virus to be identified. The virus particle comprises a single
molecule of (+) strand RNA, about 6.4 kb in length, enclosed
within a helical protein coat (Fig. 4.6B; see also Fig. 1.9). The
coat is built from a single protein with an extended shape.
Repetitive interactions among coat protein subunits form
disks, which in turn assemble as a long, rod-like, right-handed
helix. In the interior of the helix, each coat protein mole-
cule binds three nucleotides of the RNA genome. The coat pro-
tein subunits therefore engage in identical interactions with
one another and with the genome, allowing the construction
of a large, stable structure from multiple copies of a single
protein.

The particles of several families of animal viruses with (-)
strand RNA genomes, including filoviruses, paramyxoviruses,
rhabdoviruses, and orthomyxoviruses, contain internal struc-
tures with helical symmetry that are encased within an
envelope. In all cases, these structures contain an RNA mol-
ecule, many copies of an RNA-packaging protein (designated
NP or N), and the viral RNA polymerase and associated en-
zymes responsible for synthesis of mRNA and viral genomes.
Despite common helical symmetry and similar composition,
the internal components of these (-) strand RNA viruses ex-
hibit considerable diversity in morphology and organization.
For example, the nucleocapsids of the filovirus Zaire ebolavi-
rus and the paramyxovirus Sendai virus are long, filamen-
tous structures in which the NP proteins, like the tobacco
mosaic virus coat protein, make regular interactions with the
RNA genome. In contrast, the nucleocapsids of rhabdovi-
ruses such as vesicular stomatitis virus are bullet shaped (Fig.
4.6C). Furthermore, an additional viral protein is essential to
maintain their organization: vesicular stomatitis virus nucle-
ocapsids released from within the envelope retain the di-
mensions and morphology observed in intact particles but
