128 Chapter 4

ical properties, the tip is applied (nanoindentation) to a specific
point on the surface, such as an axis of icosahedral symmetry,
to deform the particle. Measurement of the force applied as a
function of distance (degree of indentation) allows measure-
ment of such parameters as elasticity and the force required to
break the particle at that point. This approach has led to fasci-
nating insights into how virus particles meet the seemingly
paradoxical requirements for high stability to protect viral ge-
homes and efficient disassembly during entry into a host cell.

   

Stabilization and Destabilization of Virus Particles
Inall but the simplest T'= 1 icosahedral capsids, there is some
degree of mismatch between the pentons at the 12 vertices
and the hexons that surround them. The frequent reinforce-
ment of these associations at the vertices by especially exten-
sive interactions among structural proteins, as in polioviruses
(Fig. 4.13C), or by specialized “cement” proteins, as in human
adenoviruses (Fig. 4.16B), is not therefore surprising. Never-
theless, the vertices of icosahedral capsids that have been ex-
amined by nanoindentation are the points most susceptible
to breakage (Fig. 4.30B). Indeed, human adenovirus pentons
are the first components to dissociate under mild pressure in
vitro as well as during cell entry. Furthermore, binding of in-
tegrin, the coreceptor for entry of these viruses (Chapter 5),
to pentons further weakens the capsid.

Among the minor capsid proteins of herpes simplex virus
type 1 are two that bind both pentons and neighboring hexons.
As might be anticipated, capsids that lack either of these pro-
teins exhibit decreased stiffness. In some cases, the presence of
the viral genome substantially increases capsid stability. For
example, comparison of the mechanical properties of full and
empty capsids of the (+) strand insect virus triatoma virus by
nanoindentation identified pH-dependent changes: at neutral
pH, as in infected cells, mature virus particles were some
threefold stiffer than those without genomes and more resistant
to deformation. However, these properties were reversed at a
more alkaline pH, like that of the hindgut of the insect host,
where the virus encounters host cells. Binding of the single-
stranded DNA genome of the parvovirus minute virus of mice
also increases the stiffness of virus particles, and concomitantly
their resistance to thermal inactivation.

A variety of viruses are assembled as immature forms that
are converted to infectious particles upon proteolytic processing
of structural protein precursors. It is now clearly established
that such proteolytic cleavages are accompanied by mechanical
alterations that increase internal pressure to facilitate DNA
ejection (e.g, herpesviruses and many bacteriophages) or decrease
the mechanical strength of virus particles to facilitate disassem-
bly (eg, human adenoviruses) or entry into the host cell (e.g.,
human immunodeficiency virus). Such mechanical transfor-
mations are considered in Chapters 5 and 13.

Perspectives

Virus particles are among the most elegant and visually
pleasing structures found in nature, as illustrated by the im-
ages presented in this chapter. Now that many structures of
particles or their components have been examined, we can
appreciate the surprisingly diverse architectures they ex-
hibit. Nevertheless, the simple principles of their construc-
tion proposed more than 60 years ago remain pertinent: with
few exceptions, the capsid shells that encase and protect nu-
cleic acid genomes are built from a small number of proteins
arranged with helical or icosahedral symmetry. This feature
is characteristic of even some of the largest viruses yet described,
indicating that not only genetic economy but also optimized
and regular interactions among structural units dictate virus
architecture.

The detailed views of nonenveloped virus particles pro-
vided by X-ray crystallography emphasize just how well these
protein shells provide protection of the genome during pas-
sage from one host cell or organism to another. They have also
identified several mechanisms by which identical or noniden-
tical subunits can interact to form icosahedrally symmetric
structures, and protein-protein interactions that stabilize larger
virus particles with icosahedral symmetry. More-elaborate vi-
rus particles, which may contain additional protein layers, a
lipid envelope carrying viral proteins, and enzymes or other
proteins necessary to initiate the infectious cycle, pose greater
challenges to the structural biologist. Indeed, for many years
we possessed only schematic views of these structures, de-
duced from negative-contrast electron microscopy and bio-
chemical or genetic methods of analysis. In previous editions,
we noted the power and promise of continuing refinements in
methods of cryo-EM (or cryo-electron tomography), image
reconstruction, and difference imaging. These techniques
have attained atomic- or near-atomic-level resolution, pro-
viding remarkable views of large viruses with multiple com-
ponents, viral envelopes, and, in some cases, the organization
of genomes within particles. The structural descriptions of
ever-increasing numbers of viruses representing diverse
families have also allowed unique insights into evolutionary
relationships among seemingly disparate viruses or viral
proteins.

These extraordinary advances notwithstanding, impor-
tant challenges remain, most obviously the visualization of
structures that do not exhibit simple symmetry (or are not
constructed from components that do). These structures in-
clude many genomes and the particles of some large viruses
(e.g., poxviruses). The giant viruses, such as mimiviruses and
pithoviruses, some with particles so large that they can be
seen by light microscopy, also pose new technical challenges
and intimate that unanticipated structural principles remain
to be elucidated.
