130

Chapter 4

STUDY QUESTIONS

1. Icosahedral virus particles are NOT stabilized by:

Specific “cement” or “glue” proteins

Covalent bonds

Interactions between adjacent protein layers

. Transmembrane connections of envelope to capsid
proteins

e. None of the above

aoe

. Both picornaviruses (e.g., poliovirus) and polyomavi-

ruses (e.g., simian virus 40) comprise small genomes

packaged within icosahedral capsids.

a. Indicate one similarity and two differences in the
structures of poliovirus and simian virus 40 capsids

b. Explain how ONE of these capsids does not con-
form to the rules of quasiequivalence

. Which of the following statements describes interac-

tions among components of virus particles?

a, Subunits usually associate via covalent bonds

b. Each subunit has different bonding contacts with
its neighbors

c. Capsid subunits cannot interact with the internal
viral genome

d. Subunits usually associate noncovalently

e. Subunit-subunit interactions are always sufficient
to stabilize virus particles

. Ithas long been known that virus particles can contain

host cell molecules.

a. Why is it difficult to be sure that host cell mole-
cules found in enveloped virus particles are pack-
aged specifically?

b. If specific incorporation of a cellular protein into
particles of a virus had been demonstrated, how
would you investigate the functional importance
of capture of the cellular protein?

5. Viral envelopes:

a. Are invariably derived from host cell membranes

b. Contain viral glycoproteins with external and

internal domains connected by transmembrane

segments

Can lie above or underneath a capsid

d. Are generally impermeable to ions and charged
molecules

e. Allof the above

9

6. What are the three modes of packing viral genomes
in virus particles? Give an example of each mode of
packaging.

7. Characteristic features of large virus particles do NOT
include:

a. Distinct parts with helical or icosahedral symmetry
b. The presence of multiple viral enzymes

c. Structures dedicated to exit of the viral genome

d. More than a single membrane

e. A large DNA or RNA genome

8. Mature virus particles are said to be metastable.

a. Explain what is meant by this term and why virus
particles must be metastable

b. Predict the consequences of a mutation that pre-
cludes formation of metastable virus particles dur-
ing assembly and maturation

9. Which of the following statements about helical sym-
metry is INCORRECT?

a. Helical viruses can contain RNA or DNA genomes

b. These genomes can be packaged by either special-
ized nucleic acid binding proteins or direct contact
with coat proteins

c. Asthe structure of a helix is open, the largest known
viruses display helical symmetry

d. Helical viruses can be naked or enveloped

Viral enzymes are present in many helical viruses

that reproduce in animal cells

10. You have recently isolated a virus associated with a hu-

man disease. The virus particles are spherical, ~100 nm

in diameter, and possess an envelope. Preliminary ge-

nome sequence analysis suggests the virus is not related

to known human viruses.

a. Indicate how you would determine the structure of
this virus, and the rationale for your choice of method

b. Which protein topology would you be most likely
to find in the major capsid protein?

11. Subunits of viral capsid proteins are ~20 to 100 kDa.

a. Explain how large icosahedral capsids can be as-
sembled and how they differ from small capsids

b. What feature(s), other than genetic economy, dic-
tates that all capsids are built from only a very small
number of major structural proteins?

9
