124 Chapter 4

 

Figure 4.28 Features of mimivirus capsids. (A) Cryo-EM recon-
struction of Cafeteria roenbergensis mimivirus at 21-A resolution.
Although not decorated with fibers, the surface of this capsid is charac-
terized by high protrusions formed by surface loops of the double B-
barrel jelly roll major capsid protein. These pseudohexagonal structure
units are organized in discrete arrays, termed pentasymmetrons (pur-
ple) and trisymmetrons (blue, red, green, cyan, and orange), which
form the vertices and interact at the threefold axes of symmetry, re-
spectively. One of the 30 edges of the icosahedral particle is indicated in
cyan, and the position of five-, three-, and twofold axes of symmetry by
red symbols. Adapted from Xiao C et al. 2017. Sci Rep 7:5484, under
license CC BY 4.0. Courtesy of C. Xiao, University of Texas at El Paso.
(B) Cryo-EM reconstruction of Acanthamoeba polyphaga mimivirus
following sequential digestion with lysozyme and the protease brome-
lain. This treatment was applied to remove (or reduce) the dense array
of surface fibers (Fig. 4.1), which increase ice thickness around the
particles and hence signal-to-noise because of random scattering of
electrons. The reconstruction (61 A), which is based on only fivefold av-
eraging, is viewed down the stargate (blue). ‘The size of this assembly
with extensions of the arms some 200 A almost to neighboring vertices
is clearly evident. Adapted from Xiao C et al. 2009. PLoS Biol 7:e92 under
license CC BY 4.0. © 2009 Xiao et al. Courtesy of M. Rossman, Purdue
University.

termed mature virions and enveloped extracellular virions,
which differ in the number and origin of membranes. Mature
virions are large, enveloped structures (~350 to 370 x 250 x
270 nm) comprising at least 75 proteins that appear in the
electron microscope as brick or barrel shaped (depending on
the orientation) (Fig. 4.29A). A number of internal structures
have been observed by examination of thin sections through
purified particles or by cryo-electron tomography (Fig.
4.298). These features include the core wall, which surrounds
the central core that contains the ~200-kbp DNA genome,
and lateral bodies. Remarkably, the core contains some 20
enzymes with many different activities. Although viral pro-
teins that contribute to these various structures have been
identified, our understanding of vaccinia virus architecture
remains at low resolution.

Pithoviruses
Pithovirus particles are the largest described to date, in-
deed are visible in the light microscope. They are ovoid or am-

     

Core wall
Core

Membrane

Figure 4.29 Virus particles with alternative architectures.
Structural features of the poxvirus vaccinia virus. (A) Surface render-
ing of intracellular mature particles of vaccinia virus reconstructed
from cryo-electron tomograms showing the brick shape and irregular
protrusions from the surface. (B) Translucent visualization of the re-
constructed particle volume showing the dumbbell-shaped core and
external membrane. A and B reprinted from Cyrklaff M et al. 2005.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U $ A 102:2772-2777, with permission. Courtesy of
J.L. Carrascosa, Universida Autonoma de Madrid. The virus Pithovirus
sibericum was isolated following culture of a suspension of soil from a
sample of permafrost collected in 2000 in Siberia. (C) Morphology of
this virus particle, viewed by energy-filtered cryo-EM to facilitate visu-
alization of thick, ice-embedded particles. The internal nucleoid, which
appears rather featureless, is likely covered by a membrane, a thick pro-
tein layer termed the tegument, and a low-density outer layer. (D) The
apical cork, which is made up of vertical fibers and hence appears stri-
ated, resides at one end of the particle. C and D reprinted from Okamoto K
etal. 2017. Sci Rep 7:13291, under license CC BY 4.0. Courtesy of K. Okamoto,
Uppsala University, Sweden.

phora-like in shape and variable in length (most commonly
1.35 to 1.65 nm). The internal nucleoid, which contains the
double-stranded DNA genome of some 0.6 Mbp, is enclosed
within what is thought to be a lipid membrane, in turn en-
cased in a thick protein layer (the tegument). The apex of
