120 Chapter 4

DISCUSSION

A virus particle with different structures in different hosts

Throughout this chapter, we describe mature
virus particles in terms of a single structure:
“the” structure. However, it is important to
appreciate that the architectures reported
are those of particles isolated and examined
under a single set of specific conditions, typ-
ically far from physiological. Structural
studies of the flavivirus dengue virus, an im-
portant human pathogen, illustrate the con-
formational plasticity of some mature virus
particles.

‘The organization of the single dengue vi-
rus envelope glycoprotein, E, described in
the text (Fig. 4.25) is that observed in parti-
cles propagated in cells of the mosquito vec-
tor maintained at 28°C. As noted previously,
the E protein dimers are tightly packed and
icosahedrally ordered. However, the epi-
topes for binding of antibodies that neutral-
ize the virus at 37°C are either partially or
entirely buried, suggesting that the virus par-
ticle might undergo temperature-dependent
conformational transitions. Indeed, when
particles are exposed to temperatures en-
countered in the mammalian host (e.g.,
37°C), they do expand significantly, expos-
ing segments of the underlying membrane,

28°C

 

234°C

Structures of dengue virus particles at 28°C (left) and at 234°C (right), with the axes of five-,
three-, and twofold rotational symmetry indicated by a pentagon, triangle, and ellipse, re-
spectively. The E protein dimers that lie at the twofold axes are shown in gray and the other dimers
with one subunit in green and one in cyan. The two oligosaccharides attached to each E protein
monomer are indicated in red and yellow. ‘The particles exposed to higher temperatures are charac-
terized by exposed patches of membrane (purple) and significant reduction of dimer contacts at the
threefold axes of icosahedral symmetry. Reprinted from Rey FA. 2013. Nature 497:443-444, with
permission. Courtesy of F.A. Rey, Institut Pasteur.

and the E protein interactions are altered
(compare the left and right panels in the fig-
ure). In fact, particles exposed to higher
temperatures are heterogeneous, and the ex-
ample shown in the figure (right) represents
but one of multiple forms, identified during
selection of particles for three-dimensional

reconstruction. Because a heterogeneous
population of particles with less well-ordered
E protein dimers represents the form of den-
gue virus recognized by the human immune
system, these observations have important
implications for the design of dengue virus
vaccines.

Fibriansah G, Ng TS, Kostyuchenko VA, Lee J, Lee S,
‘Wang, Lok SM. 2013. Structural changes in dengue
virus when exposed to a temperature of 37°C. J Virol
87:7585-7592.

‘Zhang X, Sheng J, Plevka P, Kuhn RJ, Diamond MS,
Rossmann MG, 2013. Dengue structure differs at
the temperatures of its human and mosquito hosts.
Proc Natl Acad Sci US A 110:6795-6799.

Particles with Helical or Icosahedral
Parts

Bacteriophage T4

Bacteriophage T4, which has been studied for more than
50 years, is the classic example of an architecturally elaborate
virus that contains distinct parts that exhibit icosahedral or
helical symmetry. The T4 particle, which is built from ~30 of
the proteins encoded in the ~170-kbp double-stranded DNA
genome, is a structurally elegant machine tailored for active
delivery of the genome to host cells. The most striking feature
is the presence of morphologically distinct and functionally
specialized structures, notably the head containing the genome
and a long tail that terminates in a baseplate from which six
long tail fibers protrude (Fig. 4.26A).

‘The head of the mature T4 particle, an elongated icosahe-
dron, is built from hexamers of a single viral protein (gp23*).
In contrast to the other capsids considered so far, two T num-
bers are needed to describe the organization of gp23* in the
two end structures (T = 13) and in the elongated midsection
(T = 20). As in adenoviral capsids, the pentamers that occupy
the vertices contain a different viral protein, and additional
proteins reside on the outer or inner surfaces of the icosahedral
shell (Fig. 4.26B). One of the 12 vertices is occupied by a unique
structure termed the connector, which joins the head to the
tail. Such structures are derived from a nanomachine termed
the portal, which pulls DNA into immature heads. Portals are
a characteristic feature of the capsids of other families of DNA-
containing bacteriophages, as well as of herpesviruses.
