 

Structure 123

Glycoproteins
Envelope
Membrane

Tegument cap

Nucleocapsid

 

      

 

Outside capsid

i See

Inside capsid

 

@ vP19C
© UL17, UL25, UL36C
© Tegument proteins

 

 

 

Figure 4.27 Structural features of herpesvirus particles. (A) Two slices through a cryo-
electron tomogram of a single herpes simplex virus type 1 particle, showing the eccentric tegument
cap (arrowheads). Reprinted from Grunewald K et al. 2003. Science 302:1396-1398, with permis-
sion. (B) Diagram of the structure of the herpesviral capsid based on high resolution (3.5 A or bet-
ter) cryo-EM structures of herpes simplex virus 1 and 2 and illustrated within a virus particle.
Shown below is an enlarged view down a 5-fold axis of icosahedral symmetry. (C) The single portal
of herpes simplex virus type 1 nucleocapsids visualized by staining with an antibody specific for the
viral UL6 protein conjugated to gold beads is shown to the left. The gold beads are electron dense
and appear as dark spots in the electron micrograph. They are present at a single vertex in each nu-
cleocapsid, which therefore contains one portal. A 16-A reconstruction of the UL6 protein portal based.
on cryo-EM is shown on the right. Adapted from Trus BL et al. 2004. J Virol 78:12668-12671, with
permission. (D) Central slice through a cryo-electron tomographic reconstruction based on symmetry-
free averaging is shown radially colored as indicated. Portal vertex-associated density is shown in
cyan and purple. Adapted from Schmid MF et al. 2012. PLoS Pathog 8:e1002961, under license CC
BY 4.0. © Schmid et al. Courtesy of A.C. Steven, National Institutes of Health (A and C), W. Chiu,
Baylor College of Medicine (B), and FJ. Rixon, MRC-University of Glasgow Center for Virus Research,
Glasgow, United Kingdom (D).

dense surface fibers (as for a 65-A reconstruction of Acan-
thamoeba polyphaga mimivirus). Such studies have revealed the
icosahedral organization of major capsid proteins (Fig. 4.28)
and in some cases their arrangement into assemblies that in-
teract around the five- or threefold axes of symmetry. The
most unique feature, first observed in Acanthamoeba polyph-
aga mimivirus, is the presence of a star-shaped structure at
one vertex (Fig 4.28B). This stargate, which allows release of
internal contents of virus particles into the cytoplasm of in-
fected cells, is an exceptionally large vertex structure, with
arms extending almost to neighboring vertices. As yet, little
is known about how such large capsids (up to ~5,000 A in di-
ameter) are stabilized, or the organization of their internal
components.

Alternative Architectures

‘The particles of other large viruses exhibit regular and some-
times remarkable morphologies that are not obviously based
on helical or icosahedral symmetry. One example, Acidianus
bottle-shaped virus, is portrayed in Fig. 4.1. We briefly de-
scribe two others here to illustrate the structural diversity of
such viruses.

Poxviruses

Particles of poxviruses such as vaccinia virus also com-
prise multiple, distinct structural elements, but none of these
exhibit obvious icosahedral or helical symmetry. A second
distinctive feature is that two forms of infectious particles are
produced in vaccinia virus-infected cells (see Chapter 13),
