are typically performed under extreme conditions, for ex-
ample, very low temperature, and the structures described
are based on the averaging of very large numbers of parti-
cles. Consequently, these approaches provide no informa-
tion about the dynamic or mechanical properties that
underlie the functions of virus particles. Such information
can be collected by various biophysical methods, including
small-angle X-ray scattering and calorimetry. Atomic force
microscopy, which permits both imaging of virus particles

    
 
  

Cantilever

 
   

   

 

ey

Approach g

and contact °
Sample <>
z-displacement

x

g

Indentation W 8
<>
z-displacement

x

g

Ba Q Mechanical 8

failure

 

<>
z-displacement

Structure 127

and measurement of mechanical properties, has been espe-
cially useful.

In this method, a very sharp tip attached to a cantilever
scans the surface of a sample immobilized on a solid support
(Fig. 4.30A). Deflections of the cantilever to or from the sur-
face during scanning are detected by a laser beam via a posi-
tion-sensitive detector. In this way, the topography of the
surface of a sample such as a virus particle can be imaged, al-
beit at relatively low resolution (Fig. 4.30B). To assess mechan-

Figure 4.30 Atomic force microscopy and its application to
human adenovirus particles. (A) A schematic illustration of na-
noindentation of virus particles. Virus particles are attached to a solid
surface, such as a glass coverslip or mica, and the tip of an atomic force
microscope (chosen to be smaller than the radius of the particles of in-
terest) brought into contact. The tip is attached to a cantilever that
moves to or from the surface of the particle as it is scanned. Deflections
of a laser beam focused on the tip during scanning are recorded via a
photodiode, allowing construction of an image of the particle surface.
When the force applied via the tip is increased, the degree of deforma-
tion of the particle is measured as a function of force, as illustrated in
the center. As the force increases, the virus particle eventually breaks,
leading to a sudden drop in resistance (bottom). This force is often
called the breaking force. Courtesy of G. Nemerow, The Scripps Re-
search Institute. (B) Shown in the right two panels are atomic force mi-
croscopy images of a particle of human adenovirus type 5 with short
fibers derived from type 35 before and after application of sufficient
force to induce mechanical failure. The degree of resolution is low, but
sufficient to determine the orientation of these icosahedral particles on
the surface. To characterize mechanical failure in more detail, the re-
sponses of individual particles were scored on the basis of whether an
edge, a facet, or a vertex was probed, revealing three distinct patterns
(left three panels). This approach established that the vertices are the
weakest points, exhibiting the lowest spring constant and breaking
force. Adapted from Snijder J et al. 2013. J Virol 87:2756-2766.

After

Before

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

     

B 2-4fold 3-fold S-fold
6 J
2
El 4
g
224 S |
0 Ae —_—_, ——— ae ———
0 10 20 30 40 0 10 20 30 40 0 10 20 30 40

Virus indentation (nm) Virus indentation (nm)

   

 

 

Virus indentation (nm)
