126 Chapter 4

primers for viral genome replication that are covalently
linked to the genomes of picornaviruses such as poliovirus
and adenoviruses. Others include several tegument pro-
teins of herpesviruses, such as the VP16 protein, which ac-
tivates transcription of viral immediate-early genes to
initiate the viral program of gene expression. The cores of
vaccinia virus also contain proteins that are essential for
transcription of viral genes, as they allow recognition of vi-
ral early promoters. Other herpesvirus tegument proteins
induce the degradation of cellular mRNA or block cellular
mechanisms by which viral proteins are presented to the host’s
immune system. Retroviruses with complex genomes, such
as human immunodeficiency virus type 1, contain addi-
tional proteins required for efficient viral reproduction in
certain cell types. These proteins are discussed in Volume II,
Chapter 12.

Cellular Macromolecules

Virus particles can also contain cellular macromolecules that
play important roles during the infectious cycle, such as the cel-
lular histones that condense and organize polyomaviral and
papillomaviral DNAs. Because they are formed by budding, en-
veloped viruses can readily incorporate cellular proteins and
other macromolecules. For example, cellular glycoproteins
may not be excluded from the membrane from which the vi-
ral envelope is derived. Furthermore, as a bud enlarges and
pinches off during virus assembly, internal cellular compo-
nents may be trapped within it. Enveloped viruses are also
generally more difficult to purify than naked viruses. Indeed,
analysis by the sensitive proteomic methods provided by mass
spectrometry has identified from 50 to 100 cellular proteins
in purified, enveloped particles of various herpesviruses, filo-
viruses, and rhabdoviruses. Consequently, it can be difficult
to distinguish cellular components specifically incorporated
into enveloped virus particles from those trapped randomly
or copurifying with the virus. Nevertheless, in some cases it is
clear that cellular molecules are important components of vi-
rus particles: these molecules are reproducibly observed at a
specific stoichiometry and can be shown to be essential or
play pivotal roles in the infectious cycle. The cellular compo-
nents captured in retrovirus particles have been particularly
well characterized.

The primer for initiation of synthesis of the (-) strand
DNA during reverse transcription in retroviral genomes is a
specific cellular transfer RNA (tRNA), such as tRNALys3 in
the case of human immunodeficiency virus type 1. These
RNAs are incorporated into virus particles via association
with the reverse transcriptase domains of one type of poly-
protein (Gag-Pol) that in turn is assembled into particles via
interactions with the Gag polyprotein (Chapter 13). The cog-
nate human lysyl tRNA synthase is also selectively packaged

 

into human immunodeficiency virus type 1 particles and fa-
cilitates initiation of reverse transcription (Chapter 10).

A variety of membrane proteins have been observed in
retrovirus particles, but appear to be acquired nonspecifically
by virtue of their presence at the sites of particle budding. In
contrast, several cytoplasmic proteins of the host cell are pack-
aged specifically. It was reported more than 20 years ago that
human immunodeficiency virus type | particles contain cellu-
lar cyclophilin A (PPlase A). This chaperone is the major cyto-
plasmic member of a ubiquitous family of peptidyl-prolyl
isomerases. It is bound to the N terminus of the capsid (CA)
protein and catalyzes isomerization of a single Gly-Pro bond in
the protein. Substitutions in CA that impair binding of cy-
clophilin A reduce the infectivity of virus particles in some cell
types. However, the effects of depletion of the cellular chaperone
and of its inhibitors in virus-producing cells or in newly in-
fected target cells have established that it is PPlase A present in
new target cells, not the protein carried by incoming virus par-
ticles, that is important. Its presence in virus particles is simply
a secondary consequence of interactions with the CA domain
of viral polyproteins.

Clathrin heavy chain, which mediates formation of endo-
somes (Chapter 5), is also selectively incorporated into the
particles of many retroviruses. In the case of human immu-
nodeficiency virus type 1, clathrin is recruited by a specific
interaction with the integrase (IN) domain of the Gag-Pol
polyprotein. Substitutions in the IN region that impair asso-
ciation with clathrin reduce production of virus particles,
and are thought to lead to premature processing of the poly-
proteins from which particles assemble (Chapter 13).

Cellular components present in virus particles may serve
to facilitate virus reproduction, a property exemplified by the
cellular tRNA primers for retroviral reverse transcription.
However, incorporation of cellular components can also pro-
vide antiviral defense. As discussed in Volume II, Chapters 3
and 6, packaging of a cellular enzyme that converts cytosine
to uracil (APOBEC3) into human immunodeficiency virus
type | particles at the end of one infectious cycle leads to deg-
radation and hypermutation of viral DNA synthesized early
in the next cycle of infection.

Mechanical Properties of Virus
Particles

Investigation of Mechanical Properties

of Virus Particles

As illustrated in the preceding sections, studies of purified
virus particles by methods such as X-ray crystallography
and cryo-EM can yield high-resolution descriptions of the
interactions among particle components responsible for the
assembly and sturdiness of these nanomachines. Such studies
