122 Chapter 4

A

Head

(4 external
proteins, DNA,
2 core proteins,
and other
internal proteins)

    
   
    
   
    
  
    

Connector

@ proteins) aug

Contractile tail
(1 protein in
outer sheath and
1 in internal tube)

Whisker (1 protein)

Long tail fiber
(4 proteins)

(~16 proteins)

 

Figure 4.26 Morphological complexity of bacteriophage T4. (A) A model of the virus particle. (B)
Structure of the head (22-A resolution) determined by cryo-EM, with the major capsid proteins shown in blue
(gp23*) and magenta (gp24*), the protein that protrudes from the capsid surface in yellow, the protein that
binds between gp23* subunits in white, and the beginning of the tail in green. Reprinted from Fokine A et al.
2004. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S.A 101:6003-6008, with permission. Courtesy of M. Rossmann, Purdue University.

papillomaviruses) is stabilization of the particle by disulfide
bonds, which covalently link both subunits of the triplexes
and triplexes to VP5 subunits of adjacent hexons to impart ri-
gidity. Such a network of covalent bonds must greatly increase
the stability of the large nucleocapsid and may also be neces-
sary to counter the high pressure exerted on this protein shell
(see “Mechanical Properties of Virus Particles”).

Although apparently a typical and quite simple icosahe-
dral shell, this viral capsid is in fact an asymmetric struc-
ture: 1 of the 12 vertices is occupied not by a VP5 penton but
by a unique structure termed the portal. The portal com-
prises 12 copies of the UL6 protein and is a squat, hollow
cylinder that is wider at one end and surrounded by a two-
tiered ring at the wider end (Fig. 4.27C). The incorporation
of the portal, which is connected to the viral membrane (Fig.
4,27D), has important implications for the mechanism of
assembly and delivery of viral genomes during entry (see
Chapters 13 and 5).

The tegument contains >20 viral proteins, viral RNAs,
and cellular components. A few tegument proteins are ico-
sahedrally ordered, as a result of direct contacts with the
structural units of the capsid. For example, three tegument
proteins form a distinctive structure that caps the pentons

and buttresses their association with neighboring triplexes.
Tegument proteins are not uniformly distributed around
the capsid, but are concentrated on one side, where they
form a well-defined cap-like structure (Fig. 4.27A). The
connection of the portal vertex of the capsid to the viral
membrane (Fig. 4.27D) seems likely to account for this
asymmetry.

Mimiviruses

Characteristic features of members of the Mimiviridae,
which infect single-cell eukaryotes, are their very large, double-
stranded DNA genomes and correspondingly huge particles.
Initial examinations of these viruses by electron microscopy
established that they comprise multiple layers, include a lipid
membrane within an external capsid, and in some cases in-
clude a dense layer of surface fibers (Fig. 4.1). Despite their large
size, mimivirus particles exhibit some familiar structural fea-
tures, notably icosahedral symmetry and a capsid built from a
major capsid protein with the double B-barrel jelly roll topology.
To date, cryo-EM reconstructions of these viruses have
achieved only a relatively low resolution, because of the need
for much computational power (e.g, ~3 x 10° CPU hours for a
21-A view of Cafeteria roenbergensis virus) and/or removal of
