pithovirus is closed by a protruding “cork” with a hexagonal,
grid-like appearance (Fig. 4.29C and D). Following uptake of
virus particles into host cells by phagocytosis, this unusual
cork structure is expelled to allow fusion of the viral nucleoid
membrane with that of the cellular vacuole. Unprecedented
assemblies specialized for release of the viral genome in host
cells may prove to be a characteristic property of the very large
viruses.

Other Components of Virions

Some virus particles comprise only the nucleic acid genome
and structural proteins necessary for protection and delivery
into a host cell. However, many contain additional viral pro-
teins, which are generally present at much lower concentra-
tions but essential or important for establishing an efficient
infectious cycle (Table 4.3).

Enzymes

Many types of virus particles contain enzymes necessary for
synthesis of viral nucleic acids. These enzymes generally cata-
lyze reactions unique to virus-infected cells, such as synthesis

Table 4.3 Some virion enzymes

Virus Protein

Adenovirus

Human adenovirus type 2 13 23k

Herpesvirus

Herpes simplex virus type 1 vp24
ULI3
Vhs

Orthomyxovirus

Influenza A virus P proteins

Poxvirus
Vaccinia virus* DNA-dependent RNA polymerase
(8 subunits)

Poly(A) polymerase (2 subunits)
Capping enzyme (2 subunits)
DNA topoisomerase

Proteases 1 and 2

Reovirus
Reovirus type 1 22
23
Retrovirus
Human immunodeficiency virus Pol
type 1
IN
PR
Rhabdovirus
Vesicular stomatitis virus L

Structure 125

of viral mRNAs from an RNA template or of viral DNA
from an RNA template (retroviral reverse transcriptases).
However, virions of vaccinia virus contain a DNA-depen-
dent RNA polymerase, analogous to cellular RNA polymer-
ases, as well as several enzymes that modify viral RNA
transcripts (Table 4.3). This complement of enzymes is neces-
sary because transcription of the viral double-stranded DNA
genome takes place in the cytoplasm of infected cells, whereas
cellular DNA-dependent RNA polymerases and the RNA-
processing machinery are restricted to the nucleus. Other
types of enzymes found in virus particles include integrase,
cap-dependent endonuclease, and proteases. The proteases
sever covalent connections within polyproteins or precursor
proteins from which some virus particles assemble, a reaction
that is necessary for the production of infectious particles
(Chapter 13).

Other Viral Proteins

Virus particles may also contain additional viral proteins that
are not enzymes but nonetheless are important for an efficient
infectious cycle. Among the best characterized are the protein

Function(s)
Protease; production of infectious particles
Protease; capsid maturation for genome encapsidation

Protein kinase
RNase

RNA-dependent RNA polymerase; synthesis of viral mRNA and vRNA;
cap-dependent endonuclease

Synthesis of viral mRNA

Synthesis of poly(A) on viral mRNA.
Addition of 5’ caps to viral pre-mRNA
Sequence-specific nicking of viral DNA
Virus particle morphogenesis

Guanylyltransferase
Double-stranded RNA-dependent RNA polymerase

Reverse transcriptase; proviral DNA synthesis

Integrase; integration of proviral DNA into the cellular genome

Protease; production of infectious particles

RNA-dependent RNA polymerase; synthesis of viral mRNA and vRNA.

 

“Vaccinia virions contain some 20 enzymes, only a few of which are listed.
