Structure 121

BOX
DISCUSSION
The extreme pleomorphism of influenza A virus,
a genetically determined trait of unknown function

 

Some enveloped viruses vary considerably in
size and shape. For example, the particles of
paramyxoviruses, such as measles and Sendai
viruses, range in size from 120 to up to 540 nm
in diameter and may contain multiple copies
of the (-) strand RNA genome in helical nu-
cleocapsids of different pitch. Influenza A vi-
rus particles exhibit even more extreme
pleomorphism: they appear spherical, ellipti-
cal, or filamentous, and all forms come in a
wide range of sizes (see the figure). Clinical
isolates are primarily filamentous but adopt
the spherical morphologies when adapted to
propagation in the laboratory, particularly in
chicken eggs.

Several lines of evidence indicate that the
filamentous phenotype is genetically deter-
mined. For example, the particles of some
influenza A virus isolates are primarily fila-
mentous, whereas those of other isolates are
not. Furthermore, genetic experiments have
identified specific residues in the matrix pro-
teins (MI and M2) required for assembly of

filamentous particles. Deletion of the internal
domain of the NA glycoprotein also induces
formation of elongated particles, a phenotype
exacerbated by concurrent removal of the cy-
toplasmic tail of the major viral glycoprotein
HA. These observations imply that matrix-
glycoprotein interactions during assembly
govern the morphology of influenza A virus
particles. However, the mechanism underly-
ing the “choice” between assembly of filamen-
tous versus spherical particles is not well
understood and the influence of host cell
components remains obscure. Furthermore,
the physiological significance of the filamen-
tous particles is not known, despite their pre-
dominance in clinical isolates. It has been
speculated that these forms might facilitate
cell-to-cell transmission of virus particles
through the respiratory mucosa of infected
hosts.

Badham MD, Rossman JS. 2016. Filamentous influ-
enza viruses. Curr Clin Microbiol Rep 3:155-161.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Cryo-electron tomogram sections of influ-
enza A virus particles (strain PR8). Bar = 50 nm.
Reprinted from Nayak DB et al. 2009. Virus Res
143:147-161, with permission. Courtesy of D.B.
Nayak, University of California, Los Angeles.

In contrast to the head, the ~100-nm-long tail, which
comprises two protein layers, exhibits helical symmetry (Fig.
4.26A). The outer layer is a contractile sheath that functions
in injection of the viral genome into host cells. The tail is con-
nected to the head via a hexameric ring and at its other end to
a complex, dome-shaped structure termed the baseplate,
where it carries the cell-puncturing spike. Both long and
short tail fibers project from the baseplate. The former, which
are bent, are the primary receptor-binding structures of bac-
teriophage T4. As discussed in Chapter 5, remarkable confor-
mational changes induced upon receptor binding by the tips
of the long fibers are transmitted via the baseplate to initiate
injection of the DNA genome.

Herpesviruses

Members of the Herpesviridae exhibit a number of unusual
architectural features. More than half of the >80 genes of her-
pes simplex virus type 1 encode proteins found in the large
(~200-nm-diameter) virus particles. These proteins are com-
ponents of the envelope from which glycoprotein spikes pro-
ject or of two distinct internal structures. The latter are the
nucleocapsid surrounding the DNA genome and the protein-
aceous layer encasing this structure, called the tegument

(Fig. 4.27A). Until recently we possessed only relatively low-
resolution views (at best, ~7 A) of herpesviral particles. Technical
advances in cryo-EM image reconstruction, including relaxa-
tion of icosahedral symmetry restraints, produced high-reso-
lution structures of herpes simplex virus type 1 and type 2
particles (3.2 to 3.5 A), by far the largest virus particles to be
visualized in such detail. These remarkable achievements
confirmed architectural elements of the nucleocapsid shared
with smaller virus particles, but also revealed new features.

A single protein (VP5) forms both the hexons and the pen-
tons of the T = 16 icosahedral capsid of herpes simplex virus
type 1 (Fig. 4.27B). Like the structural units of the smaller sim-
ian virus 40 capsid, these VP5-containing assemblies make
direct contact with one another. However, the segments of
VP5 subunits that form the nucleocapsid floor adopt quite dif-
ferent conformations in the pentons and hexons (Fig. 4.27B).
Similarly, specific VP5 regions display distinct arrangements
in hexons that abut pentons and those surrounded entirely by
other hexons. These differences optimize interactions among
the structural units. The large herpesviral capsid, like that of
adenoviruses, is further stabilized by additional proteins, in-
cluding two that form triplexes that link the major structural
units. A second property shared with polyomaviruses (and
