Structure 111

EXPERIMENTS

A fullerene cone model of the human immunodeficiency

virus type 1 capsid

Diverse lines of evidence support a fullerene
cone model of this capsid based on principles
that underlie the formation of icosahedral and
helical structures.

(A) A purified human immunodeficiency
virus type 1 protein comprising the capsid
linked to the nucleocapsid proteins, CA-NC
self-assembles into cylinders and cones when
incubated with a segment of the viral RNA ge-
nome in vitro. The cones assembled in vitro are
capped at both ends, and many appear very
similar in dimensions and morphology to
cores isolated from viral particles (compare the
two panels, shown at the same scale, as indi-
cated by the bars). From Ganser BK et al. 1999.
Science 283:80-83, with permission. Courtesy
of W. Sundquist, University of Utah. (B) The
very regular appearance of the synthetic CA-
NC cones suggested that, despite their asym-
metry, they are constructed from a regular,
underlying lattice analogous to the lattices that
describe structures with icosahedral symme-
try discussed in Box 4.3. In fact, the human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 cores can be
modeled using the geometric principles that
describe cones formed from carbon. Such ele-
mental carbon cones comprise helices of
hexamers closed at each end by caps of buck-
minsterfullerene, which are structures that
contain pentamers surrounded by hexamers.
As in structures with icosahedral symmetry,
the positions of pentamers determine the ge-
ometry of cones. However, in cones, pentamers
are present only in the terminal caps. The hu-
man immunodeficiency virus type 1 cones
formed in vitro and isolated from mature viri-
ons can be modeled as a fullerene cone assem-
bling on a curved hexagonal lattice with five
pentamers (red) at the narrow end of the cone,
as shown in the expanded view. The wide end
would be closed by an additional 7 pentamers
(because 12 pentamers are required to form a
closed structure from a hexagonal lattice).
(©) The fullerene cone model was subsequently
confirmed and refined by cryo-EM of helical

and with other proteins in multiple ways can provide an effec-

A B

In vitro-assembled cone

particle

 

 

tubes of CA at higher resolution, molecular dy-
namics simulations, and cryo-EM of cores pu-
rified from and within virus particles. Shown.
is an example of computational slices of perfect
fullerene cones observed within virus parti-
cles, with cryoelectron tomographic models
superimposed. The C-terminal domains of CA
molecules are shown in gray, the N-terminal
domains of CA pentamers in blue, and those of
CA hexamers colored according to the quality
of their alignment, from red (low) to green
(high). From Mattei S. 2017. Science 354:1434—
1437, with permission. Courtesy of J. Briggs,

   

;~ HIV-1 core

 

veoh

@~

European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Hei-
delberg, Germany.

Li S, Hill CP, Sundquist WI, Finch JT. 2000. Image
reconstructions of helical assemblies of the HIV-1
CA protein, Nature 407:409-413.

Zhao G, Perilla JR, Yufenyuy EL, Meng X, Chen B,
NingJ, Ahn J, Gronenborn AM, Schulten K, Aiken
C, Zhang P. 2013. Mature HIV-1 capsid structure by
cryo-electron microscopy and all-atom molecular
dynamics. Nature 497:643-646.

‘Mattei S, Glass B, Hagen WJH, Kriusslich H-G,
Briggs JAG. 2016. The structure and flexibility of
conical HIV-1 capsids determined within intact vi-
ions. Science 354:1434-1437.

Other Capsid Architectures

tive alternative. The organization of the two protein shells de-
scribed above appears to be conserved in most viruses with
double-stranded RNA genomes. However, it is not yet known
whether symmetry mismatch is also a feature of other large vi-
ruses that contain multiple protein layers.

As noted previously, capsids with icosahedral or helical
symmetry are characteristic of the majority of virus parti-
cles described to date. Nevertheless, these architectures
are not universal, and the capsids of even some relatively
small viruses can be constructed according to an alternative
