112 Chapter 4

design. This property is exemplified by the capsids of some
retroviruses.

‘The capsid of all retroviruses surrounds a nucleoprotein
that contains the diploid (+) strand RNA genome. The capsid
is surrounded by the viral matrix (M) protein, which is en-
cased in the viral envelope. However, retroviral capsids may
be spherical, cylindrical, or conical, the shape exhibited by
capsids of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 and other
lentiviruses (Fig. 4.18A and B). These capsids are built from a
single capsid (CA) protein, which can form both pentamers
and hexamers. The odd appearance of the human immuno-
deficiency virus type 1 capsid might suggest that it represents
an exception to the geometric rules that dictate the viral ar-
chitectures described in previous sections. However, this is
not the case: this capsid can be described by a fullerene cone
model that combines principles of both icosahedral and heli-
cal symmetry. In this model (Box 4.6), which has been con-
firmed by cryo-electron tomography of intact virus particles,
a closed structure is formed using 12 pentamers, just as in an
icosahedral capsid. However, pentamers are not spaced at
regular intervals throughout the structure. Rather, they are
restricted to the terminal caps and separated by spirals (a
variant of helical symmetry) of CA hexamers that form the
body of the cone.

Packaging the Nucleic Acid Genome

A definitive property of a virion is the presence of a nucleic
acid genome. Incorporation of the genome requires its dis-
crimination from a large population of cellular nucleic acid.
This packaging process is described in Chapter 13. The vol-
umes of closed capsids are finite. Consequently, accommoda-
tion of viral genomes necessitates a high degree of condensation
and compaction. A simple analogy illustrates vividly the
scale of this problem; packing of the ~150-kbp DNA genome
of herpes simplex virus type 1 into the viral capsid is equiva-
lent to stuffing some 10 ft of 22 American gauge wire (diame-
ter, 0.644 mm) into a tennis ball. Such confinement of the
genome can result in high internal pressure, equivalent to
that generated in locomotive steam engines, some 18 and 25
atm within herpes simplex virus type 1 and phage capsids,
respectively. Such pressure provides the force that powers
ejection of DNA genomes. Packaging of nucleic acids is an
intrinsically unfavorable process because of the highly con-
strained conformation imposed on the genome. In some cases,
the force required to achieve packaging is provided, at least in
part, by specialized viral proteins that harness the energy re-
leased by hydrolysis of ATP to drive the insertion of DNA. In
many others, the binding of viral RNA or DNA genomes to
capsid proteins appears to provide sufficient energy. The lat-
ter interactions also help to neutralize the negative charge of
the sugar-phosphate backbone, a prerequisite for close juxta-
position of genome sequences.

We possess relatively little information about the organi-
zation of genomes within viral particles: nucleic acids or pro-
tein-nucleic acid assemblies are not visible in the majority of
high-resolution structural studies reported. This limitation
indicates that the genomes or internal structures lack the
symmetry of the capsid, do not adopt the same conformation
in every viral particle, or both. Nevertheless, three mecha-
nisms for condensing and organizing nucleic acid molecules
within capsids can be distinguished and are described in the
following sections.

Direct Contact of the Genome with

a Protein Shell

In the simplest arrangement, the nucleic acid makes direct
contact with the protein(s) that forms the protective shell of the
virus particle. Proteins on the inner surfaces of the icosahedral
capsids of many small RNA viruses interact with the viral ge-
nome. As we have seen, the interior surface of the poliovirus
capsid can be described in detail. Nevertheless, we possess no
structural information about the arrangement of the RNA ge-
nome, for the nucleic acid is not visible in the X-ray structure.
However, the genome of the porcine picornavirus Seneca Val-
ley virus has been visualized by this method (albeit at low res-
olution) (Fig. 4.19A). Much of the RNA genome forms an outer
layer in which it makes extensive contact with the inner sur-
face of the capsid. Highly ordered RNA genomes are also pres-
ent in T = 3 nodaviruses, such as Flock house virus, in which
an outer decahedral cage of ordered RNA surrounds addi-
tional rings (Fig 4.19B). More recently, higher-resolution views
(sufficient to observe some bases in the RNA!) of a small viral
RNA genome have been obtained using cryo-EM reconstruc-
tion without imposition of any symmetry (Box 4.7). This ap-
proach is likely to be more widely applicable.

Use of the same protein or proteins both to condense the
genome and to build a capsid allows efficient utilization of
limited genetic capacity. It is therefore an advantageous ar-
rangement for viruses with small genomes. However, this
mode of genome packing is also characteristic of some larger
viruses, notably rotaviruses and herpesviruses. The genome
of rotaviruses comprises 11 segments of double-stranded
RNA located within the innermost of the three protein shells
of the particle. Remarkably, as much as 80% of the RNA ge-
nome appears highly ordered within the core, with strong el-
ements of icosahedral symmetry (Fig. 4.19B).

One of the most surprising properties of the large herpes-
viral capsid is the absence of internal proteins associated with
viral DNA: despite intense efforts, no such core proteins have
been identified, and the viral genome has not yet been visu-
alized. In contrast, cryo-EM has allowed visualization of the
large, double-stranded DNA genome of bacteriophage 4,
which is organized in closely apposed, concentric layers (Fig.
4.20A). This arrangement illustrates graphically the remark-
