EXPERIMENTS
A high-resolution view of an encapsidated viral genome

The small icosahedral capsid (T = 3) of the
Escherichia coli bacteriophage MS2 is built
from dimers of a single coat protein and one
copy of a maturation protein, which is respon-
sible for delivery of the genome to host cells.
‘The capsid contains a single-stranded (+) RNA.
genome of 3,569 bases, the first genome to be
sequenced completely. Cryo-EM of MS2 parti-
cles and averaging of more than 300,000 im-
ages without imposing any symmetry allowed
visualization of >80% of the viral RNA genome
at 6-A resolution. As shown in panel A of the
figure, most of the RNA showed prominent
major and minor grooves; ie., it is double-
stranded, and is organized as stem-loops. Some
of these structures could be examined at higher
resolution (3.6 A), indicating that they are more
ordered, and their sequences determined from.
features of purines and pyrimidines seen in the groove
EM density (panel B in the figure). This study
illustrates the power of asymmetric reconstruc- _ Structure of a small viral RNA genome. (A) Cut-open view of the asymmetric reconstruction of MS2
tion of images collected by cryo-EM, and the _ (6 A) with the capsid shell colored yellow to red (by radial distance), the maturation protein in magenta,
high degree of viral genome folding that can be and the RNA in blue with major and minor grooves indicated. (B) A segment of an RNA stem-loop ob-
served at 3.6-A resolution, with RNA backbone and bases imposed on the EM density (mesh). Adapted
from Dai X et al. 2017. Nature 541:112-116, with permission. Courtesy of H. Zhou, University of Cali-
fornia, Los Angeles. See also https://media.nature.com/original/nature-assets/nature/journal/v541/
17635/extref/nature20589-svl.mp4.

Major
groove

  

imposed by interactions with capsid proteins.

Dai X, LiZ, Lai M, Shu , Du Y, Zhou ZH, Sun R. 2017.
In situ structures of the genome and genome-delivery
apparatus in a single-stranded RNA virus. Nature
541:112-116.

A DNA layers

    

Connector

Figure 4.20 Packing of double-stranded DNA genome. (A) Dense packing in the head of bacteriophage T4 DNA. The central section of a 22-A
cryo-EM reconstruction of the head of bacteriophage T4 viewed perpendicular to the fivefold axis is shown. The concentric layers seen underneath the
capsid shell have been attributed to the viral DNA genome. The connector, which is derived from the portal structure by which the DNA genome enters
the head during assembly, connects the head to the tail. Adapted from Fokine A et al. 2004. Proc Natl Acad Sci U $ A 101:6003-6008, with permission.
Courtesy of M. Rossmann, Purdue University. (B) (Left) Cryo-EM reconstruction of the polyomavirus BK virus shown as a 40-A-thick slab, with fitted
VPI density in gray, density assigned to the minor structural proteins VP2 and VP3 in blue/green, and to packaged double-stranded DNA in yellow to
pink. These colored densities were not observed in virus-like particles assembled from only VP1. (Right) An enlarged view of the density below a single
VPI penton, indicating the thickness of the radial layers of DNA and the spacing between them. A model of double-stranded DNA as it appears when
wrapped on a human histone (blue) is superimposed. Adapted from Hurdiss DL et al. 2016. Structure 24:528-536, licensed under CC BY 4.0. Courtesy of
N.A. Ranson, University of Leeds, United Kingdom.
