116 Chapter 4

DISCUSSION
A viral membrane directly surrounding the genome

‘The membranes present in particles of animal
viruses are external structures separated from
the genome by at least one protein layer. As we
have seen, internal protein layers contribute to
condensation and organization of the genome
via interactions of the nucleic acid with spe-
cialized nucleic acid-binding proteins or the
internal surfaces of capsids. However, this ar-
rangement is not universal: the particles of
some archaeal and bacterial viruses, as well as
giant viruses that infect eukaryotes, contain an
internal membrane derived from their host
cells.

This property is exemplified by Sulfolobus g
turreted icosahedral virus, which infects a hy-
perthermophilic archaeon. This virus has a
double-stranded DNA genome, a major capsid
protein containing two B-barrel jelly roll do-
mains, and pentons built from dedicated viral
proteins. The capsid encases a lipid membrane
rather than an internal nucleoprotein core. As
shown in panel A of the figure, a large space
separates the capsid and the membrane, with
contact between the capsid and the membrane
limited to the fivefold axes of icosahedral sym-
metry, where the most internal domain of the
penton base protein contacts a viral trans-
membrane protein. Particles purified from
Sulfolobus turreted icosahedral virus-infected
cells include forms that lack the capsid and ex-

Archaeal

Ether.
inert ®

   
  

The internal membrane of an archaeal vi-
rus. (A) Cross section through a near-atomic-
resolution reconstruction of Sulfolobus turreted
icosahedral virus, showing the unique vertex
structures (turrets) and the separation of the
capsid shell from the membrane. The internal
surface of the membrane (yellow) is in direct
contact with the double-stranded DNA genome
(red). Adapted from Veesler D et al. 2013. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 110:5504~-5509, with per-
mission. Courtesy of C.-Y. Fu, The Scripps Re-
search Institute. (B) Schematic comparison of
archaeal monolayer membrane-forming and eu-
karyotic bilayer membrane-forming lipids.

Genome
Membrane

Capsid

Turret

 

Eukaryotic

.

either end to various polar head groups. Be-
cause of the latter property, these lipids can
form monolayer membranes, in contrast to the
lipid bilayers formed in animal cells (panel B).
The ether linkages, cyclopentane rings, and
branched acyl chains considerably increase the
stability of membranes formed from these
specialized lipids, facilitating survival of the
organism and protection of the Sulfolobus tur-
reted icosahedral virus genome during transit
through the harsh environments (e.g., pH 3
and temperature of 80°C) inhabited by its host.

linkage

 

Khayat R, Fu CY, Ortmann AC, Young MJ, Johnson
JE. 2010. The architecture and chemical stability of
the archaeal Sulfolobus turreted icosahedral virus.

hibit the size and morphology of lipid cores
alone. These observations suggest that the
membrane, rather than the capsid, is the major
determinant of particle stability.

‘The internal membrane of the Sulfolobus
turreted icosahedral virus is built from mem-

brane-forming lipids synthesized specifically
in thermophilic and hyperthermophilic ar-
chaea: they comprise long chains (e.g, Cy.
compared to C,, to C,, typical of mammalian
cells) that comprise cyclopentane rings and
branched, isoprenoid-like units ether-linked at

J Virol 84:9575-9583.

Veesler D, Ng TS, Sendamarai AK, Eilers BJ, Law-
rence CM, Lok $M, Young MJ, Johnson JE, Fu CY.
2013. Atomic structure of the 75 MDa extremophile
Sulfolobus turreted icosahedral virus determined by
CryoEM and X-ray crystallography. Proc Natl Acad
Sci US A 110:5504-5509.

particles. Other viral glycoproteins that mediate cell attach-
ment and entry, such as the E protein of the flavivirus tick-
borne encephalitis virus, adopt a quite different orientation
(and structure); the external domain of E protein is a flat,
elongated dimer that lies on the surface of the viral membrane
rather than projecting from it (Fig. 4.23B). Despite their lack
of common structural features, the HA and the E proteins are
both primed for dramatic conformational change to allow en-
try of internal virion components into a host cell (Chapter 5).

The high-resolution viral glycoprotein structures men-
tioned above are those of the large external domains of the
proteins that had been cleaved from the viral envelope by
proteases. This treatment facilitates crystallization but, of
course, precludes analysis of membrane-spanning or internal

segments of the proteins, both of which may contribute to the
structure or function of the proteins: membrane-spanning
domains can contribute to the stability of oligomeric glyco-
proteins, as in influenza virus hemagglutinin (HA), while in-
ternal domains can anchor the envelope to internal structures.
Improvements in resolution achieved by application of cryo-
electron microscopy or tomography have allowed visualiza-
tion of these segments of glycoproteins of some enveloped
viruses.

Other Envelope Proteins

The envelopes of some viruses, including orthomyxovi-
ruses, herpesviruses, and poxviruses, contain integral mem-
brane proteins that lack large external domains or possess
