118 Chapter 4

containing the (+) strand RNA genome. This inner protein
layer is a T'= 4 icosahedral shell built from 240 copies ofa single
capsid (C) protein arranged as hexamers and pentamers. The
outer layer of the envelope also contains 240 copies of the
viral glycoproteins El and E2, which form heterodimers. These
heterodimers cover the surface of the particle, such that the
lipid membrane is not exposed on the exterior. Strikingly,
the glycoproteins are also organized into a T= 4 icosahedral
shell (Fig. 4.24A).

The structure of Sindbis virus has been determined by
cryo-EM and image reconstruction to some 9-A resolution
(Fig. 4.24A), while the structures of the El and C proteins of
the related Semliki Forest virus have been solved at high res-
olution. The organization of the alphavirus envelope, includ-
ing the transmembrane anchoring of the outer glycoprotein
layer to structural units of the nucleocapsid, can therefore be
described with unprecedented precision. The transmem-
brane segments of the El and E2 glycoproteins form a pair of
tightly associated @-helices, with the cytoplasmic domain of
E2 in close apposition to a cleft in the capsid protein (Fig.
4.24B and C). This interaction accounts for the 1:1 symmetry
match between the internal capsid and exterior glycopro-
teins. On the outer surface of the membrane, the external
portions of these glycoproteins, together with the E3 protein,
form an unexpectedly elaborate structure: a thin T = 4 icosa-
hedral protein layer covers most of the membrane (Fig. 4.24A
and B) and supports the spikes, which are hollow, three-lobed
projections (Fig. 4.24C).

 

|_ Lipid bilayer
|_Glycoprotein spike

Transmembrane
helix

Skirt

 

 

 

 

‘The structures formed by external domains of membrane
proteins of the important human pathogens West Nile virus
and dengue virus (family Flaviviridae) are quite different:
they lie flat on the particle surface rather than forming pro-
truding spikes (Fig. 4.25; see also Box 4.9). Nevertheless, the
alphavirus El protein and the single flavivirus envelope (E)
protein exhibit the same topology (Fig. 4.25A), suggesting
that the genes encoding them evolved from a common ances-
tor. Furthermore, the external domains of flaviviral E proteins
are also icosahedrally ordered, and the envelopes of viruses
of these families are described as structured. In contrast, as
described in the next section, the arrangement of membrane
proteins generally exhibits little relationship to the structure
of the capsid or internal nucleoprotein when virus particles
contain additional protein layers.

 

Enveloped Viruses with an Ad: nal

Protein Layer

Enveloped viruses of several families contain an additional
protein layer that mediates interactions of the genome-
containing structure with the viral envelope. In the simplest
case, a single viral protein, termed the matrix protein, welds
an internal ribonucleoprotein to the envelope. This arrange-
ment is found in members of several groups of (-) strand
RNA viruses (Fig. 4.6C; Appendix, Fig. 17 and 31). Retrovirus
particles also contain an analogous, membrane-associated
matrix protein (MA), which is closely associated with the in-
ner surface of the viral envelope.

   

ae
2a tiie

bilayer

 

Figure 4.24 Structure of a simple enveloped virus, Sindbis virus. (A) Cross section through the cryo-EM density map of Sindbis virus, a
member of the alphavirus genus of the Togaviridae, at 11-A resolution. The lipid bilayer of the viral envelope is clearly defined at this resolution, as
are the transmembrane domains of the glycoproteins. (B) Different layers of the particle, based on the fitting of a high-resolution structure of the
El glycoprotein into a 9-A reconstruction of the virus particle. The nucleocapsid (red) (C protein) surrounds the genomic (+) strand RNA. The
RNA is the least well-ordered feature in the reconstruction, although segments (orange) lying just below the capsid protein appear to be ordered by
interaction with this protein. The C protein penetrates the inner leaflet of the lipid membrane, where it interacts with the cytoplasmic domain of
the E2 glycoprotein (blue). The membrane is spanned by rod-like structures that are connected to the skirt (see panel A) by short stems. (C) The
structure of the El and E2 glycoproteins, obtained by fitting the crystal structure of the closely related Semliki Forest virus El glycoprotein into
the 11-A density map and assigning density unaccounted for to the E2 glycoprotein. The three E2 glycoprotein molecules in a trimeric spike are
colored light blue, dark blue, and brown, and the El molecules shown as backbone traces colored red, green, and magenta. The portions of the pro-
teins that cross the lipid bilayer are helical. Adapted from Zhang W et al. 2002. J Virol 76:11645-11658, with permission. Courtesy of Michael

Rossmann, Purdue University.
