 

  

Structure 119

B
Flavivirus

   

Alphavirus

Figure 4.25 Conserved topology and regular packing of envelope proteins of small, (+) strand RNA viruses. (A) Ribbon diagrams
of the flavivirus envelope (E) protein dimer (top) and the alphavirus El/E2 heterodimer (bottom), with one E and the E2 subunit shown in gray.
Conserved domains of E and El are colored red, yellow, and blue with the fusion loops required for entry in orange. The membrane is below the fla-
vivirus dimer, in the plane of the figure, whereas it is perpendicular to the alphavirus E1/E2 heterodimer as indicated. The parallel and angled ori-
entations to the membrane of the flavivirus and alphavirus envelope proteins, respectively, result in the very different appearances of these particles
shown in panel B. (B) Surface renderings on the same scale, showing the regular packing of flavivirus and alphavirus envelope protein dimers. The
dimers related by two-, three-, and fivefold axes of icosahedral symmetry are colored blue, pale yellow, and mauve, respectively, except for the cen-
tral dimer depicted, which is colored as in panel A. In the 80 spikes of the alphavirus envelope, E2 is shown gray and El colored by domain as in
panel A. Adapted from Vaney MC, Rey FA. 2011. Cell Microbiol 13:1451-1459, with permission. Courtesy of F.A. Rey, Institut Pasteur.

Because the internal capsids or nucleocapsids of these mul-
tilayered enveloped viruses are not in direct contact with the
envelope, the organization and symmetry of internal struc-
tures are not evident from the external appearance of the sur-
face glycoprotein layer. Nor does the organization of these
proteins reflect the symmetry of the capsid. For example, the
outer surface of all retroviruses appears roughly spherical
with an array of projecting knobs or spikes, regardless of
whether the internal core is spherical, cylindrical, or cone
shaped. Likewise, influenza virus particles, which contain he-
lical nucleocapsids, are generally roughly spherical but are
highly pleomorphic with long, filamentous forms common in
clinical isolates (Box 4.10).

Internal proteins that contact the viral envelope are not
embedded within the lipid bilayer but rather bind to its inner

face. Such viral proteins are targeted to, and interact with,
membranes by means of specific signals, which are described
in more detail in Chapter 12.

Large Viruses with Multiple

Structural Elements

Virus particles that house large DNA genomes are structur-
ally much more intricate than any considered in previous
sections. Such particles comprise obviously distinct compo-
nents with different symmetries and/or multiple layers and in
some cases exhibit architectures that do not appear to be
based on helical or icosahedral symmetry. In this section, we
illustrate various ways in which multiple structural elements
can be combined. As we shall see, some of these elements are
dedicated to specific functions.
