 

Vesicular stomatitis virus
Rhabdovirus

Respiratory syncytial virus
Paramyxovirus

Figure 4.21 Conserved organization of the RNA-packaging
proteins of nonsegmented (-) strand RNA viruses. Ribbon dia-
grams of the N proteins indicated are shown at the top, colored from
purple at the N terminus to red at the C terminus. Their electrostatic
surfaces from negative (red) to positive (blue) are shown in the space-
filling models below, with the molecules rotated as indicated to show
the RNA-binding cleft (blue) most clearly. Although differing in struc-
tural details, these N proteins share a two-lobed structure (top) and an
RNA-binding cleft between the two lobes. Adapted from Ruigrok RW
etal. 2011. Curr Opin Microbiol 14:504-510, with permission. Courtesy
of D. Kolakofsky, University of Geneva.

are associated with polyomaviral genomes condense the DNA
by a factor of ~7. This packaging mechanism is elegant, with
two major advantages: none of the limited viral genetic infor-
mation needs to be devoted to DNA-binding proteins, and the
viral genome, which is transcribed by cellular RNA polymer-
ase Il, enters the infected cell nucleus as a nucleoprotein
closely resembling the cellular templates for this enzyme.

Viruses with Envelopes

In addition to the capsids described previously, many virus
particles possess an envelope formed by a viral protein-
containing membrane that is derived from the host cell.
However, viral envelopes vary considerably in size, morphol-
ogy, and complexity, and they differ in lipid composition, the
number of proteins they contain, and their location. The

Structure 115

membranes form the outermost layer of enveloped animal vi-
ruses, but in some bacteriophages and archaeal viruses the
membrane lies beneath an icosahedral capsid (Box 4.8). Typ-
ical features of viral envelopes and their proteins are de-
scribed in the next section, to set the stage for consideration
of the structures of envelope proteins and the various ways in
which they interact with internal components of the virion.

Viral Envelope Components

‘The foundation of the envelopes of all animal viruses is a lipid
membrane acquired from the host cell during assembly. The
lipid composition is variable, because viral envelopes can be
derived from different kinds of cellular membranes. Embed-
ded in the membrane are viral proteins, the great majority of
which are glycoproteins that carry covalently linked sugar
chains, or oligosaccharides. Sugars are almost always added
to the proteins posttranslationally, during transport to the
cellular membrane at which progeny virus particles assemble.
Intra- or interchain disulfide bonds, another common chemi-
cal feature of these proteins, are also acquired during trans-
port to assembly sites. These covalent bonds stabilize the
tertiary or quaternary structures of viral glycoproteins.

Envelope Glycoproteins

Viral glycoproteins are integral membrane proteins firmly
embedded in the lipid bilayer by a short membrane-spanning
domain (Fig. 4.22). The membrane-spanning domains of vi-
ral proteins are hydrophobic a-helices of sufficient length to
span the lipid bilayer. They generally separate large external
domains that are decorated with oligosaccharides from smaller
internal segments. The former contain binding sites for cell sur-
face virus receptors, major antigenic determinants, and se-
quences that mediate fusion of viral with cellular membranes
during entry. Internal domains, which make contact with other
components of the virus particle, are often essential for virus
assembly.

With few if any exceptions, viral membrane glycoproteins
form oligomers, which can comprise multiple copies of a sin-
gle protein or may contain two or more protein chains. The
subunits are held together by noncovalent interactions and
disulfide bonds. On the exterior of particles, these oligomers
can form surface projections, often called spikes. Because of
their critical roles in initiating infection, the structures of
many viral glycoproteins have been determined.

The hemagglutinin (HA) protein of human influenza A
virus is a trimer that contains a globular head with a top sur-
face that is projected ~135 A from the viral membrane by a
long stem (Fig. 4.23A). The latter is formed and stabilized by
the coiling of a-helices present in each monomer. The mem-
brane-distal globular domain contains the binding site for the
host cell receptor. This important functional region is located
>100 A away from the lipid membranes of influenza virus
