A. Seneca Valley Virus

Figure 4.19 Ordered RNA genomes in small and large icosa-
hedral virus particles. (A) The 20-A X-ray crystal structure of the pi-
cornavirus Seneca Valley virus viewed down a twofold axis of icosahedral
symmetry, showing the density ascribed to the RNA genome (brown).
‘The structural proteins are colored as in Fig. 4.12 and 4.13: VP1 (blue),
VP2 (green), VP3 (red), and VP4 (yellow). (B) Outer layer of the double-
stranded, segmented RNA genome of the rotavirus bluetongue virus ob-
served at 6.5-A resolution by X-ray crystallography of viral cores. The
electron density of this layer of RNA (green) from maps averaged be-
tween two closely related serotypes is shown with A-form duplex RNA
modeled into the rods of density. These RNA spirals represent some 80%
of the >19-kbp genome. Reprinted from Gouet P et al. 1999. Cell 97:-
481-490, with permission. Courtesy of D.I. Stuart, University of Oxford.

ably dense packing needed to accommodate such large viral
DNA genomes in closed structures of fixed dimensions. This
type of organization must require neutralization of the
negative charges of the sugar-phosphate backbone. Neutral-
ization might be accomplished by proteins that form the in-
ner surface of the capsid, or by the incorporation of small,
basic peptides made by the host cell, such as spermine and
spermidine.

 

Structure 113

Packaging by Specialized Viral Proteins

In many virus particles, the genome is associated with spe-
cialized nucleic acid-binding proteins, such as the nucleo-
capsid proteins of (-) strand RNA viruses and (+) strand
retroviruses, or the core proteins of adenoviruses. An impor-
tant function of such proteins is to condense and protect viral
genomes. Consequently, they do not recognize specific nucleic
acid sequences but rather bind nonspecifically to RNA or
DNA genomes. This mode of binding is exemplified by the
structure of the vesicular stomatitis virus N protein, in which
9 nucleotides of RNA are tightly but nonspecifically bound in
a cavity formed between the two domains of each N protein
molecule (Fig. 4.7). These protein-RNA interactions both se-
quester the RNA genome and organize it into a helical struc-
ture. Formation of helical ribonucleoproteins by two-domain
RNA-binding proteins is a packaging mechanism common
among (-) strand RNA viruses in the order Mononegavirales:
the N proteins of representatives of other families in the order
exhibit the same two-lobed structure and mode of RNA bind-
ing (Fig. 4.21).

Electron microscopy of cores released from adenovirus
particles and cryo-EM of virus particles have suggested that
the internal nucleoprotein is also arranged in some regular
fashion. However, how the viral DNA genome is organized
and condensed by the core proteins is not known: the nucleo-
protein was not observed in the high-resolution structures of
adenovirus particles described previously, and the structures
of core proteins have not been determined. The fundamental
DNA packaging unit is a multimer of protein VII, which ap-
pears as beads on a string of adenoviral DNA when other
core proteins are removed. Protein VII binds tightly to and
condenses double-stranded DNA in vitro, consistent with a
packaging function, but has been reported to be dispensable
for assembly of virus particles (Chapter 13). Protein VII and
the other core proteins are basic, as would be expected for
proteins that bind to a negatively charged DNA molecule
without sequence specificity.

Packaging by Cellular Proteins

‘The final mechanism for condensing the viral genome, by cel-
lular proteins, is unique to polyomaviruses, such as simian vi-
rus 40, and papillomaviruses. The circular, double-stranded
DNA genomes released from these virus particles are orga-
nized into nucleosomes that contain the four cellular core his-
tones, H2A, H2B, H3, and H4, to form a minichromosome.
Comparison of cryo-EM structures of purified particles of
the human polyomavirus BK virus and virus-like particles
formed only from VPI (the major structural protein) has re-
vealed two radial shells of the DNA genome within virus par-
ticles (Fig. 4.20B). The thickness of these shells (24 A) and the
distance between them match those of double-stranded DNA
within a human nucleosome. The 20 or so nucleosomes that
