110 Chapter 4

A Reovirus B Rotavirus

o1+062

  

wie +03
—s

Core
particle

  

Inner layer

segments

Virion
VP2_ enzymes

 

segments

Figure 4.17 Structures of members of the Reoviridae. ‘The organization of mammalian reovirus (A) and rotavirus (B) particles is shown
schematically to indicate the locations of proteins, deduced from the protein composition of intact particles and of subviral particles that can be
readily isolated from them. dsRNA, double-stranded RNA. (C) X-ray crystal structure of the core of bluetongue virus, a member of the Orbivirus
genus of the Reoviridae, showing the core particle and the inner scaffold. Trimers of VP7 (VP6 in rotaviruses; panel B) project radially from the
outer layer of the core particle (left). Each icosahedral asymmetric unit, two of which are indicated by the white lines, contains 13 copies of VP7 ar-
ranged as five trimers colored red, orange, green, yellow, and blue, respectively. This layer is organized with classical T = 13 icosahedral symmetry.
As shown on the right, the inner layer is built from VP3 dimers that occupy one of two completely different structural environments, colored green
and red. Green monomers span the icosahedral twofold axes and interact in rings of five around the icosahedral fivefold axes in a T = 2 structure. In
contrast, red monomers are organized as triangular “plugs” around the threefold axes. Differences in the interactions among monomers at different
positions allow close packing to form the closed shell. As might be anticipated, VP7 trimers in pentameric or hexameric arrays in the outer layer
make different contacts with the two classes of VP3 monomer in the inner layer. Nevertheless, each type of interaction is extensive, and in total,
these contacts compensate for the symmetry mismatch between the two layers of the core. The details of these contacts suggest that the inner shell
both defines the size of the virus particle and provides a template for assembly of the outer T = 13 structure. From Grimes JM et al. 1998. Nature
395:470-478, with permission. Courtesy of D.I. Stuart, University of Oxford.

‘These subviral particles also contain the genome and virionen- A B
zymes and synthesize viral mRNAs in vitro under appropriate
conditions. High-resolution structures have been obtained for
bluetongue virus and human reovirus cores, some of the largest
viral assemblies that have been examined by X-ray crystallogra-
phy. Their thin inner layer contains 120 copies of a single pro-
tein (termed VP3 in bluetongue virus). These proteins are not
related in their primary sequences, but they nevertheless have
similar topological features and the same plate-like shape.
Moreover, in both cases, the dimeric proteins occupy one of
two different environments, and to do so, they adopt one of two
distinct conformational states, indicated as green and red in
Fig. 4.17C (right). Because of this arrangement, the green and
red dimers are not quasiequivalent, and virtually all contacts in
which the two monomer conformations engage are very differ-
ent. However, these differences allow the formation of VP3 as-

   
     

Envelope Core Spike

   

Lentivirus

semblies with either five- or threefold rotational symmetry and
hence of an icosahedral shell. This VP3 shell of bluetongue vi-
rus abuts directly on the inner surface of the middle layer,
which comprises trimers of a single protein organized into a
classical T = 13 lattice (Fig. 4.17C, left). A large number of differ-
ent (nonequivalent) contacts between these trimers and VP3
weld the two layers together and hence stabilize both. These
properties of reoviruses illustrate that a classic quasiequivalent
structure is not the only solution to the problem of building
large viral particles: viral proteins that interact with each other

Figure 4.18 Asymmetric capsids of retroviruses. (A) Variation
in the morphology of retroviruses shown schematically. Although all
retrovirus particles are assembled from the same components (see the
text), the cores are primarily spherical, cylindrical, or conical in the
case of gammaretroviruses (e.g., Moloney murine leukemia viruses),
betaretroviruses (e.g., Mason-Pfizer monkey virus), and lentiviruses
(e.g. human immunodeficiency virus type 1), respectively. (B) Cryo-
electron tomographic slice of human immunodeficiency virus type 1
showing the conical core and the glycoprotein spikes projecting
from the surface of the particle. © Jun Liu, Yale University School of
Medicine, with permission. Courtesy of H. Winkler, Florida State
University.
