Exterior

   

Membrane-
spanning
o-helix

Interior

Figure 4.22 Structural and chemical features of a typical viral
envelope glycoprotein shown schematically. The protein is in-
serted into the lipid bilayer via a single membrane-spanning domain.
This segment separates a larger external domain, which is decorated
with N-linked oligosaccharides (purple) and contains disulfide bonds
(green), from a smaller internal domain.

A Influenza virus HA trimer

  
         

Stem

 
  

      
  

(ay

 

ON
OS
CIOS

ANY

       

   

Lipid membrane

 

NT ACOUSUCECONS CTO ASUTRONS ELLOS RRC CIS aG

x,
Re ET MLN LANA ISM

Structure 117

multiple membrane-spanning segments. Among the best char-
acterized is the influenza A virus M2 protein. This small
(97-amino-acid) protein is a minor component of virus parti-
cles. In the viral membrane, two disulfide-linked M2 dimers
associate to form a noncovalent tetramer that functions as an
ion channel. This viral ion channel is the target of the influenza
virus inhibitor drug amantadine (Volume II, Fig. 9.13). The
effects of this drug, as well as of mutations in the M2 coding
sequence, indicate that M2 plays important roles during both
entry, by controlling the pH of the virus particle interior
(Chapter 5), and release of newly assembled virus particles
(Chapter 13). M2 belongs to a class of channel-creating viral
proteins called viroporins, which are present in a number of
other enveloped viruses, such as hepatitis C virus and Sindbis
virus, but also in nonenveloped viruses like simian virus 40
and papillomaviruses.

Simple Enveloped Viruses: Direct Contact

of External Proteins with the Capsid or
Nucleocapsid

In the simplest enveloped viruses, exemplified by (+) strand
RNA alphaviruses such as Semliki Forest, Sindbis, and Ross
River viruses, the envelope directly abuts an inner nucleocapsid

B Flavivirus E dimer

 

 

         
      

HMOs
Mani

         

 

 

Figure 4.23 Structures of extracellular domains of viral glycoproteins. ‘These extracellular domains, which were cleaved from transmem-
brane and internal domain for crystallization, are depicted as they are oriented with respect to the membrane of the viral envelope. (A) X-ray crystal
structure of the influenza virus HA glycoprotein trimer. Each monomer comprises HAI (blue) and HA2 (red) subunits covalently linked by a disul-
fide bond. Data from Chen J et al. 1998. Cell 95:409-417, with permission. (B) X-ray structure of the tick-borne encephalitis virus (a flavivirus) E
protein dimer, with the subunits shown in orange and yellow. PDB ID: 1SVB. Data from Rey FA, Harrison SC. 1995. Nature 375:291-298.
