100 Chapter 4

A Icosahedral symmetry

Structural unit

Fivefold axis

_7 wotold axis

Threefold axis

BED

Threefold Fivefold Twofold

  

Figure 4.9 Icosahedral packing in simple structures. (A) An icosahedron, which comprises 20 equilateral triangular faces characterized by
positions of five-, three-, and twofold rotational symmetry. The three views at the bottom illustrate these positions. (B and C) A comma represents
asingle protein molecule, and axes of rotational symmetry are indicated as in panel A. In the simplest case, T= 1 (B), the protein molecule forms the
structural unit, and each of the 60 molecules is related to its neighbors by the two-, three-, and fivefold rotational axes that define a structure with
icosahedral symmetry. In such a simple icosahedral structure, the interactions of all molecules with their neighbors are identical. In the T = 3 struc-
ture (C) with 180 identical protein subunits, there are three modes of packing of a subunit (shown in orange, yellow, and purple): a trimer (outlined
in blue) is now the asymmetric unit, which, when replicated according to 60-fold icosahedral symmetry, generates the complete structure. The or-
ange subunits are present in pentamers, formed by tail-to-tail interactions, and interact in rings of three (head to head) with purple and yellow sub-
units, and in pairs (head to head) with a purple or a yellow subunit. The purple and yellow subunits are arranged in rings of six molecules (by
tail-to-tail interactions) that alternate in the particle. Despite these packing differences, the bonding interactions in which each subunit engages are
similar, that is, quasiequivalent: for example, all engage in tail-to-tail and head-to-head interactions. Adapted from Harrison SC. 1984. Trends Bio-

chem Sci 9:345-351, with permission.

(Fig. 4.9A). In a few cases, virus particles can be readily seen
to be icosahedral (e.g., see Fig. 4.16A and 4.26). However,
most closed capsids look spherical, and they often possess
prominent surface features or viral glycoproteins in the enve-
lope that do not conform to the underlying icosahedral sym-
metry of the capsid shell. Nevertheless, the symmetry with
which the structural units interact is that of an icosahedron.

In solid geometry, each of the 20 faces of an icosahedron is
an equilateral triangle, and five such triangles interact at each
of the 12 vertices (Fig. 4.9A). In the simplest protein shells, a
trimer of a single viral protein (the subunit) corresponds to
each triangular face of the icosahedron: as shown in Fig.
4.9B, such trimers interact with one another at the five-,
three-, and twofold axes of rotational symmetry that define
an icosahedron. As an icosahedron has 20 faces, 60 identical
subunits (3 per face x 20 faces) is the minimal number needed
to build a capsid with icosahedral symmetry.

Large capsids and quasiequivalent bonding. In the sim-
plest icosahedral packing arrangement, each of the 60 sub-
units (structural or asymmetric units) consists of a single
molecule in a structurally identical environment (Fig. 4.9B).
Consequently, all subunits interact with their neighbors in an

identical (or equivalent) manner, just like the subunits of he-
lical particles such as that of tobacco mosaic virus. As the viral
proteins that form such closed shells are generally <~100 kDa
in molecular mass, the size of the viral genome that can be
accommodated in this simplest type of particle is restricted
severely. To make larger capsids, additional subunits must be
included. Indeed, the capsids of the majority of animal viruses
are built from many more than 60 subunits and can house
very large genomes. In 1962, Donald Caspar and Aaron Klug
developed a theoretical framework accounting for the prop-
erties of larger particles with icosahedral symmetry. This the-
ory has had enormous influence on the way virus architecture
is described and interpreted.

‘The triangulation number, T. A crucial idea introduced
by Caspar and Klug was that of triangulation, the descrip-
tion of the triangular face of a large icosahedron in terms of
its subdivision into smaller triangles, termed facets (Fig. 4.10).
This process is described by the triangulation number, T,
which gives the number of small “triangles” (called struc-
tural units) per face (Box 4.3). Because the minimum number
of structural units required is 60, the total number of sub-
units in the structure is 607.
