102

Chapter 4

 

BACKGROUND

‘The triangulation number, T, and how it is determined

In developing their theories about virus struc-
ture, Caspar and Klug used graphic illustra-
tions of capsid subunits, such as the net of flat
hexagons shown at the top left of panel A in the
figure. Each hexagon represents a hexamer,
with identical subunits shown as equilateral
triangles. When all subunits assemble into
such hexamers, the result is a flat sheet, or lat-
tice, which can never form a closed structure.
To introduce curvature, and hence form three-
dimensional structures, one triangle is re-
moved from a hexamer to form a pentamer in
which the vertex and faces project above the
plane of the original lattice (A, far right). As an
icosahedron has 12 axes of fivefold symmetry,
12 pentamers must be introduced to form a
closed structure with icosahedral symmetry. If
12 adjacent hexamers are converted to pen-
tamers, an icosahedron of the minimal size
possible for the net is formed. This structure is
built from 60 equilateral-triangle asymmetric
units and corresponds to a T = 1 icosahedron
(Fig. 4.9B). Larger structures with icosahedral
symmetry are built by including a larger num-
ber of equilateral triangles (subunits) per face
(Fig. 4.10). In the hexagonal lattice, this is
equivalent to converting 12 nonadjacent hex-
amers to pentamers at precisely spaced and
regular intervals.

To illustrate this operation, we use nets in
which an origin (0) is fixed and the positions
of all other hexamers are defined by the coor-
dinates along the axes labeled h and k, where h
and kare any positive integer (A, left). The hex-
amer (h, k) is therefore defined as that reached
from the origin (O) by h steps in the direction
of the h axis and k steps in the direction of the
kaxis. In the T'= 1 structure, h = 1 and k= 0 (or
h = 0 and k = 1), and adjacent hexamers are
converted to pentamers. When h = 1 and k= 1,
pentamers are separated by one step in the h
and one step in the k direction. Similarly, when
h = 2and k = 0 (or vice versa), two steps in a
single direction separate the pentamers.

‘The triangulation number, T, is the num-
ber of asymmetric units per face of the icosa-
hedron constructed in this way. It can be
shown, for example by geometry, that

T=h+hk+k
‘Therefore, when both h and k are 1, T = 3, and
each face of the icosahedron contains three
asymmetric units. The total number of units,
which must be 607, is 180. When T = 4, there
are four asymmetric units per face and a total
of 240 units (Fig. 4.10).

 

 

 

 

 

&

 

B P22,T=7

  

oT = (2? + (2)(1) + (1)? =

HSV-1, T = 16 k

 

2. T= (4)? + (4)(0) + (0)? = 16

As the integers h and k describe the spac-
ing and spatial relationships of pentamers,
that is, of fivefold vertices in the correspond-
ing icosahedra, their values can be deter-
mined by inspection of electron micrographs
of virus particles or their constituents (B).
For example, in the bacteriophage p22 capsid
(B, top), one pentamer is separated from an-
other by two steps along the h axis and one
step along the k axis, as illustrated for the
bottom left pentamer shown. Hence, h = 2, k
= 1, and T =7. In contrast, pentamers of the
herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) nucleo-
capsid (bottom) are separated by four and

 

 

 

 

 

zero steps along the directions of the h and k
axes, respectively. Therefore, h = 4, k= 0, and
T=16.

Recent application of the principles ap-
plied by Caspar and Klug to other uniform
lattices that can form icosahedra has general-
ized the theory of quasiequivalence to ac-
count for structures of virus particles that
appeared as exception, for example, T = 2
protein shells.

Cryo-electron micrographs of bacterio-
phage p22 and HSV-1 courtesy of BV.V. Prasad
and W. Chiu, Baylor College of Medicine,
respectively.
