103

Structure

 

 

EXPERIMENTS
Viral chain mail: not the electronic kind

‘The mature capsid of the tailed, double-stranded
DNA bacteriophage HK97 is a T = 7 structure
built from hexamers and pentamers of a single
viral protein, Gp5. The first hints of the remark-
able and unprecedented mechanism of stabili-
zation of this particle came from biochemical
experiments, which showed the following:

+ A previously unknown covalent pro-
tein-protein linkage forms in the final
reaction in the assembly of the capsid:
the side chain of a lysine in every Gp5
subunit forms a covalent isopeptide
bond with an asparagine in an adjacent
subunit. Consequently, all subunits are
joined covalently to each other.

This reaction is autocatalytic, depend-
ing only on Gp5 subunits organized in a
particular conformational state: the cap-
sid is enzyme, substrate, and product.
HK97 mature particles are extraordi-
narily stable and cannot be disassem-
bled into individual subunits by boiling
in strong ionic detergent.

It was therefore proposed that the cross-link-
ing also interlinks the subunits from adjacent
structural units to catenate rings of hexamers
and pentamers. The determination of the
structure of the HK97 capsid to 3.6-A resolu-
tion by X-ray crystallography has confirmed
the formation of such capsid “chain mail” (fig-
ure, panel A), akin to that widely used in ar-

 

Chain mail in the bacteriophage HK97 capsid. (A) ‘Ihe exterior of the HK97 capsid is shown at
the top, with structural units of the Gp5 protein in gray. The segments of subunits that are cross-
linked into rings are colored the same, to illustrate the formation of catenated rings of subunits. The
cross-linking is shown in the more detailed view below, down a quasithreefold axis with three pairs
of cross-linked subunits. The isopeptide bonds are shown in yellow. The cross-linked monomers
(shown in blue) loop over a second pair of covalently joined subunits (green), which in turn cross
over a third pair (magenta). Adapted from Wikoff WR et al. 2000. Science 289:2129-2133, with per-
mission. Courtesy of J. Johnson, The Scripps Research Institute. (B) Chain mail armor and sche-
matic illustration of the rings that form the chain mail.

Duda RL. 1998. Protein chainmail: catenated protein

mor (B) until the development of the crossbow.
The HK97 capsid is the first example of a
protein catenane (an interlocked ring). This
unique structure has been shown to increase

the stability of the virus particle, and it may be
necessary as the capsid shell is very thin. The
delivery of the DNA genome to host cells via
the tail of the particle obviates the need for
capsid disassembly.

in viral capsids. Cell 94:55-60.

Wikoff WR, Liljas L, Duda RL, Tsuruta H, Hendrix
RW, Johnson JE. 2000. Topologically linked protein
rings in the bacteriophage HK97 capsid. Science
289:2129-2133.

the structural properties of many small and large viruses
with icosahedral symmetry. However, it is now clear that the
molecular arrangements adopted by specific segments of
capsid proteins can govern the packing interactions of iden-
tical subunits. The resulting large conformational differ-
ences between small regions of chemically identical subunits
were not anticipated in early considerations of virus struc-
ture, because these principles were formulated when little
was known about the conformational flexibility of proteins.
As we discuss in the next sections, the architectures of both
small and more-complex viruses can depart radically from
the constraints imposed by quasiequivalent bonding. For ex-
ample, the capsid of the small polyomavirus simian virus
40 is built from 360 subunits, corresponding to the T = 6
triangulation number excluded by the rules formulated by

Caspar and Klug (Box 4.3). Furthermore, a capsid stabilized
by covalent joining of subunits to form viral “chain mail”
has been described (Box 4.4). Our current view of icosahe-
drally symmetric virus structures is therefore one that in-
cludes greater diversity in the mechanisms by which stable
capsids can be formed than was anticipated by the pioneers
in this field.

Structurally Simple Capsids

Several nonenveloped animal viruses are small enough to
be amenable to high-resolution analysis by X-ray crystallog-
raphy. To illustrate the molecular foundations of icosahedral
architecture, we have chosen three examples, the parvovirus
adenovirus-associated virus 2, the picornavirus poliovirus,
and the polyomavirus simian virus 40.
