104 — Chapter 4

 

Figure 4.11 Structure of the parvovirus adeno-associated virus 2. (A) Ribbon diagram of the single coat subunit of the T'= 1 particle. The
regions of the subunit that interact around the five-, three-, and twofold axes indicated by the lines labeled 5, 3, and 2, respectively, of icosahedral
symmetry are shown in blue, green, and yellow, respectively. The red segments form peaks that cluster around the threefold axes. (B) Surface view of
the 3-A-resolution structure determined by X-ray crystallography of purified virus particles. The regions of the single subunits from which the cap-
sid is built are colored as in panel A, and one of the faces formed by three subunits is outlined in white. Adapted from Xie Q et al. 2002. Proc Natl Acad
Sci US A 99:10405-10410. Courtesy of Michael Chapman, Florida State University.

Adeno-associated virus 2: classic T = 1 icosahedral de-
sign. The parvoviruses are very small animal viruses, with
particles of ~25 nm in diameter that encase single-stranded
DNA genomes of <5 kb. These small, naked capsids are built
from 60 copies of a single subunit organized according to T=
1 icosahedral symmetry. The protein that forms the subunits
of adenovirus-associated virus type 2, a member of the de-
pendovirus subgroup of parvoviruses (Appendix, Fig. 19),
contains a core domain commonly found in viral capsid pro-
teins (the B-barrel jelly roll; see next section), in which B-
strands are connected by loops (Fig. 4.11A). Interactions
among neighboring subunits are mediated by these loops.
‘The prominent projections near the threefold axes of rota-
tional symmetry (Fig. 4.11B), which have been implicated in
receptor binding, are formed by extensive interdigitation
among the loops from adjacent subunits. Adenovirus-associ-
ated virus vectors have proved valuable in human gene ther-
apy (Volume II, Chapter 9), in part because variations in the
sequences of these loops confer differences in tissue tropism.

Poliovirus: a T = 3 structure. As their name implies, the
picornaviruses are among the smallest of animal viruses. In
contrast to the T = 1 parvoviruses, the ~30-nm-diameter po-
liovirus particle is composed of 60 copies of a multimeric
structural unit. It contains a (+) strand RNA genome of ~7.5 kb
and its covalently attached 5’-terminal protein, VPg (Appen-
dix, Fig. 21). Our understanding of the architecture of the
Picornaviridae took a quantum leap in 1985 with the deter-
mination of high-resolution structures of human rhinovirus
14 and poliovirus.

The heteromeric structural unit of the poliovirus capsid
contains one copy each of VPI, VP2, VP3, and VP4. The VP4
protein is synthesized as an N-terminal extension of VP2 and
restricted to the inner surface of the particle. The poliovirus
capsid is built from asymmetric units that contain one copy
of each of three different proteins (VP1, VP2, and VP3), and
is therefore described as a pseudo T'= 3 structure (Fig. 4.12A).
Although these three proteins are not related in amino acid
sequence, all contain a central B-sheet structure termed a B-
barrel jelly roll. The arrangement of B-strands in these B-
barrel proteins is illustrated schematically in Fig. 4.12B, for
comparison with the actual structures of VPI, VP2, and VP3.
As can be seen in the schematic, two antiparallel B-sheets
form a wedge-shaped structure. The protein backbones in B-
barrel domains of VP1, VP2, and VP3 are folded in the same
way; that is, they possess the same topology, and the differ-
ences among these proteins are restricted largely to the loops
that connect B-strands and to the N- and C-terminal seg-
ments that extend from the central B-barrel domains.

The B-barrel jelly roll conformation of these picornaviral
proteins is also seen in the core domains of capsid proteins of
a number of plant, insect, and vertebrate (+) strand RNA vi-
ruses, such as tomato bushy stunt virus and Nodamura virus.
This structural conservation was entirely unanticipated. Even
more remarkably, this relationship is not restricted to small
RNA viruses: the major capsid proteins of the DNA-containing
parvoviruses and polyomaviruses also contain a B-barrel do-
main, and two such domains form the major capsid proteins of
larger DNA-containing viruses, such as adenoviruses and
mimiviruses. It is well established that the three-dimensional
