vP4 VP2 VP3 VPI
ea)

vPO

 

Structure 105

v1 4]

 

Figure 4.12 Packing and structures of poliovirus proteins. (A) The packing of the 60 VP1-VP2-VP3 structural units, represented by wedge-
shaped blocks corresponding to their B-barrel domains. Note that the structural unit (outlined in black) contributes to two adjacent faces of an ico-
sahedron rather than corresponding to a facet. When virus particles are assembled, VP4 is covalently joined to the N terminus of VP2, from which
it is later cleaved. It is located on the inner surface of the capsid shell (see Fig. 4.13A). (B) The topology of the polypeptide chain in a B-barrel jelly roll
is shown at the top left. The B-strands, indicated by arrows, form two antiparallel sheets juxtaposed in a wedge-like structure. One of the B-sheets
comprises one wall of the wedge, while the second, sharply twisted B-sheet forms both the second wall and the floor. The two dt-helices (purple cyl-
inders) that surround the open end of the wedge are also conserved in location and orientation in these proteins. As shown, the VP1, VP2, and VP3
proteins each contain a central B-barrel jelly roll domain. However, the loops that connect the B-strands in this domain of the three proteins vary
considerably in length and conformation, particularly at the top of the B-barrel, which, as represented here, corresponds to the outer surface of the
capsid. The N- and C-terminal segments of the protein also vary in length and structure. The very long N-terminal extension of VP3 has been trun-
cated in this representation. The structures of VP1, VP2, and VP3 are from PDB ID: 1HXS.

structures of cellular proteins have been highly conserved
during evolution, even though there may be very little amino
acid sequence identity. For example, all globins possess a
common topology based on a particular arrangement of
eight a-helices, even though their amino acid sequences are
different. One interpretation of the common occurrence of
the B-barrel jelly roll domain in viral capsid proteins is that
seemingly unrelated modern viruses (e.g., picornaviruses
and parvoviruses) share some portion of their evolutionary
history. It is also possible that this domain topology repre-
sents one ofa limited number commensurate with packing of
proteins to form a sphere, and therefore an example of con-
vergent evolution. The structural (and other) properties of vi-
ruses with double-stranded DNA genomes provide compelling
support for the first hypothesis (Box 4.5).

‘The overall similarity in shape of the B-barrel domains of
poliovirus VP1, VP2, and VP3 facilitates both their interaction
with one another to form the 60 structural units of the capsid

 

and the packing of these units. How well these interactions are
tailored to form a protective shell is illustrated by the model of
the capsid shown in Fig. 4.13: the extensive interactions among
the B-barrel domains of adjacent proteins form a dense, rigid
protein shell around a central cavity in which the genome re-
sides. The packing of the B-barrel domains is reinforced by a
network of protein-protein contacts on the inside of the capsid,
which are particularly extensive about the fivefold axes (Fig.
4.13C). The interaction of five VP1 molecules, which is unique
to the fivefold axes, results in a prominent protrusion extend-
ing to about 25 A from the capsid shell (Fig. 4.13A). The pro-
trusion appears as a steep-walled plateau encircled by a valley
or cleft. In the capsids of many picornaviruses, these depres-
sions, which may contain the receptor-binding sites, are so
deep that they have been termed canyons.

One of several important lessons learned from high-
resolution analysis of picornavirus capsids is that their design
does not conform strictly to the principle of quasiequivalence.
