106 Chapter 4

DISCUSSION

Remarkable architectural relationships among viruses with

double-stranded DNA genomes

Viruses with double-stranded DNA genomes
are currently classified by the International
Committee on the Taxonomy of Viruses into
31 families on the basis of the criteria de-
scribed in Chapter 1. As might be expected,
these viruses exhibit different morphologies
and infect diverse organisms representing all
three domains of life. They span a large size
range, with genomes from a few kilobase
pairs (members of the Polyomaviridae) to
>2,500 kbp (Pandoravirus). Nevertheless, con-
sideration of structural properties indicates
that these very disparate virus families in fact
represent a limited number of architectural
types.

Structural information is now available
for the major capsid proteins of representa-
tives of some two-thirds of families of known.
double-stranded DNA viruses. Based on the
fold of the proteins, most of these families can
be assigned to one of just five structural classes.
It is noteworthy that the two most common.
major capsid protein folds, the double B-barrel
jelly roll and the HK97-like, are found in vi-
ruses that infect Bacteria, Archaea, and Eu-
karya (including mammals), as summarized
in the figure.

The small number of building blocks seen
in the major capsid proteins of these viruses
might indicate convergent evolution, the com-
patibility of only a tiny fraction of the >1,400
distinct protein folds described to date with
assembly of an infectious virus particle. How-
ever, viruses that infect hosts as divergent as

bacteria and humans share more than the ar-
chitectural elements of their major capsid
proteins. This property is exemplified by the
bacteriophage PRD1 and human adenoviruses,
in which the major structural unit comprises
a trimer of monomers each with two jelly roll
domains and hence exhibiting pseudohexag-
onal symmetry. These icosahedral capsids also
share a structural unit built from different
proteins at the positions of fivefold symmetry,
from which project proteins that attach to
the host cell receptors; features of their linear
double-stranded DNA genomes, such as the
presence of inverted terminal repetitions; and
mechanisms of viral DNA synthesis. Extensive
similarities in morphology and the mecha-
nisms of particle assembly and active genome
packaging are also shared by tailed, double-
stranded DNA viruses that infect bacteria,
e.g., phage T4, and herpesviruses. It is there-
fore difficult to escape the conclusion that
these modern viruses evolved from ancient
common ancestors (see also Volume II,
Chapter 10).

Abrescia NG, Bamford DH, Grimes JM, Stuart DI.
2012. Structure unifies the viral universe. Annu Rev
Biochem 81:795-822.

Benson SD, Bamford JK, Bamford DH, Burnett RM.
1999, Viral evolution revealed by bacteriophage
PRD1 and human adenovirus coat protein struc-
tures. Cell 98:825-833.

Koonin EV, Krupovic M, Yutin N. 2015. Evolution of
double-stranded DNA viruses of eukaryotes: from
bacteriophages to transposons to giant viruses. Ann
NY Acad Sci 1341:10-24.

   
 

BACTERIA
Corticoviridae
ARCHAEA Tectiviridae
Turriviridae (STIV) — Myoviridae
Myoviridae Podoviridae

Siphoviridae Siphoviridae

EUKARYA

Adenoviridae
lridoviridae
Mimiviridae
Poxviridae
Herpesviridae

The simplified evolutionary tree shows just
some of the branches within each domain of
life, with archaeal, bacterial, and eukaryote
hosts of viruses described in this chapter in-
dicated. Viruses with major capsid proteins with
the double jelly roll and HK97-like folds are listed
in red and blue, respectively. STIV, sulfolobus
turreted icosahedral virus.

For example, despite the topological identity and geometric
similarity of the jelly roll domains of the proteins that form
the capsid shell, the subunits do not engage in quasiequiva-
lent bonding: interactions among VP1 molecules around the
fivefold axes are neither chemically nor structurally equiva-
lent to those in which VP2 or VP3 engage.

Simian virus 40: an alternative icosahedral design. The
capsids of the small DNA polyomaviruses simian virus 40
and mouse polyomavirus, ~50 nm in diameter, are organized
according to a different design that is not based on quasiequiv-
alent interactions. The structural unit is a pentamer of the ma-
jor structural protein, VP1. The capsid is built from 72 such
pentamers engaged in one of two kinds of interaction. Twelve
pentamers occupy positions of fivefold rotational symmetry, in
which each is surrounded by five neighbors. Each of the re-

maining 60 pentamers is surrounded by six neighbors at posi-
tions of sixfold rotational symmetry in the capsid (Fig. 4.14A).
Consequently, the 72 pentamers of simian virus 40 occupy a
number of different local environments in the capsid, because
of variations in packing around the five- and sixfold axes.

Like the three poliovirus proteins that form the capsid
shell, simian virus 40 VP1 contains a large central B-barrel
jelly roll domain, in this case with an N-terminal arm anda
long C-terminal extension (Fig. 4.14B and C). However, the
arrangement and packing of VP1 molecules bear little resem-
blance to the organization of poliovirus capsid proteins. The
VPI f-barrels in each pentamer project outward from the
surface of the capsid to a distance of about 50 A, in sharp
contrast to those of the poliovirus capsid proteins, which tilt
along the surface of the capsid shell. As a result, the surface of
simian virus 40 is much more “bristly” than that of poliovirus
