108 Chapter 4

molecules. The same capsid design is also exhibited by human
papillomaviruses.

Simian virus 40 and poliovirus capsids differ in their sur-
face appearance, in the number of structural units, and in the
ways in which these structural units interact. Nevertheless,
they share important features, including modular organiza-
tion of the proteins that form the capsid shell and a common
B-barrel domain as the capsid building block. Neither polio-
virus nor simian virus 40 capsids conform to strict quasi-
equivalent construction: all contacts made by all protein
subunits are not similar, and in the case of simian virus 40,
the majority of VP1 pentamers are packed in hexameric ar-
rays. Nevertheless, close packing with icosahedral symmetry
is achieved by limited variations of the contacts, either among
topologically similar, but chemically distinct, surfaces (polio-
virus) or made by a flexible arm (simian virus 40).

Structurally simple icosahedral capsids in more-complex
particles. Several viruses that are architecturally more so-
phisticated than those described in the previous sections
nevertheless possess simple protein coats built from one or a
few structural proteins. The complexity comes from the addi-
tional protein and lipid layers in which the capsid is enclosed
(see “Viruses with Envelopes” below).

 

Structurally Sophisticated Capsids

Some naked viruses are considerably larger and more elabo-
rate than the small RNA and DNA viruses described in the
previous section. The characteristic feature of such virus parti-
cles is the presence of proteins devoted to specialized structural
or functional roles. Despite such complexity, detailed pictures
of the organization of this type of virus particle can be con-
structed by using combinations of biochemical and structural
methods. Well-studied human adenoviruses and members of
the Reoviridae exemplify these approaches. These two exam-
ples also illustrate distinct mechanisms by which large icosahe-
dral capsids can be stabilized, via either specialized proteins
that glue interactions among major capsid proteins or mutually
reinforcing associations between protein layers.

Adenovirus. The most striking morphological features of
the adenovirus particle (maximum diameter, 150 nm) are the
well-defined icosahedral appearance of the capsid and the
presence of long fibers at the 12 vertices (Fig. 4.15A). A fiber,
which terminates in a distal knob that binds to the adenovi-
ral receptor, is attached to each of the 12 penton bases located
at positions of fivefold symmetry in the capsid. The remain-
der of the shell is built from 240 additional subunits, the tri-
meric hexons (Fig. 4.15B). Formation of this capsid depends
on nonequivalent interactions among subunits: the hexons
that surround pentons occupy a different bonding environ-
ment than those surrounded entirely by other hexons. The

X-ray crystal structures of the trimeric hexon (the major cap-
sid protein) established that each protein monomer contains
two B-barrel domains, each with the topology of the f-barrels
of the simpler RNA and DNA viruses described in the previ-
ous section (Fig. 4.15B). The very similar topologies of the
two B-barrel domains of the three monomers facilitate their
close packing to form the hollow base of the trimeric hexon.
Interactions among the monomers are very extensive, partic-

   
  
   
 
 
  
  
   
 

A
Fiber
Terminal protein (TP) Penton }Penton
— base
Hexon Protein VI
Protein Mu: Protein VII

Protease Protein VIII

Protein Illa

Protein V

Viral DNA Protein IX

 

Figure 4.15 Structural features of adenovirus particles. (A)
‘The organization of human adenovirus type 5 is shown schematically
to indicate the locations of the major (hexon, penton base, and fiber)
and minor (IIIa, VI, VIII, and IX) capsid proteins and of the internal
core proteins, V, VII, and 1. The locations of these proteins and some
interactions were initially deduced from the composition of the prod-
ucts of controlled dissociation of viral particles and the results of cross-
linking studies. This schematic is based on subsequent high-resolution
structures of adenovirus particles. (B) Structure of the hexon homotri-
mer from PDB ID: 1P30. The monomer (left) is shown as a ribbon dia-
gram, with gaps indicating regions that were not defined in the X-ray
crystal structure at 2.9-A resolution, and the trimer (right) is shown as
a space-filling model with each monomer in a different color. The
monomer contains two f-barrel jelly roll domains colored green and
blue in the left panel. The trimers are stabilized by extensive interac-
tions within both the base and the towers.
