Structure 107

B Cc
Plateau

      
   

Canyon

VP3

Myristate
vP4

 

VPI

 

Figure 4.13 Interactions among the proteins of the poliovirus capsid. (A) Ribbon representation of the particle, with four pentamers
removed from the capsid shell and VP1 in blue, VP2 in green, VP3 in red, and VP4 in yellow, as in Fig. 4.12A, and myristate chains in white. Note
the large central cavity in which the RNA genome resides; the dense protein shell formed by packing of the VP1, VP2, and VP3 B-barrel domains;
and the interior location of VP4, which decorates the inner surface of the capsid shell. (B) Space-filling representation of the exterior surface show-
ing the packing of the B-barrel domains of VP1, VP2, and VP3. Interactions among the loops connecting the upper surface of the B-barrel domains
of these proteins create the surface features of the virion, such as the plateaus at the fivefold axes, which are encircled by a deep cleft or canyon. The
particle is also stabilized by numerous interactions among the proteins on the inner surface of the capsid. (C) These internal contacts are most ex-
tensive around the fivefold axes, where the N termini of five VP3 molecules are arranged in a tube-like, parallel B-sheet. The N termini of VP4 mol-
ecules carry chains of the fatty acid myristate, which are added to the protein posttranslationally. The lipids mediate interaction of the B-sheet
formed by VP3 N termini with a second B-sheet structure, containing strands contributed by both VP4 and VPI molecules. This internal structure
is not completed until the final stages of, or after, assembly of virus particles, when proteolytic processing liberates VP2 and VP4 from their precur-
sor, VPO. This reaction therefore stabilizes the capsid. Panels A and B were created by Jason Roberts, Doherty Institute, Melbourne, Australia.

VPI
Pentamer with
6 neighbors

VP1
Pentamer with
5 neighbors

   
 
 

Figure 4.14 Structural features of simian virus 40. (A) View of the simian virus 40 particle showing the organization of VP1 pentamers. One
of the 12 5-coordinated pentamers is shown in purple and 10 of the 60 pentamers present in hexameric arrays are in light gray. The individual VP1
molecules in the pentamers surrounding a pentamer with five neighbors (purple) are colored red, blue, green, yellow, and orange. The image was cre-
ated by Jason Roberts, Doherty Institute, Melbourne, Australia. (B) The topology of the VP1 protein shown in a ribbon diagram, with the strands of
the B-barrel jelly roll colored as in Fig. 4.12B. This f-barrel domain is perpendicular to the capsid surface. The C-terminal arm and @.-helix shown in
magenta is the invading arm from a different neighboring pentamer (not shown), which is clamped in place by extensive interactions of its -strand
with the N-terminal segment of the subunit shown. This subunit also interacts with the N-terminal arm from its anticlockwise neighbor in the same
pentamer (not shown). (C) VP1 pentamer with each subunit shown in a different color, and one VP! from a neighboring pentamer (colored magenta)
showing the C-terminal arm invading the yellow VPI of the neighboring pentamer. The structures shown in panels B and C are from PDB ID: ISVA.

(compare Fig. 4.13A and 4.14A). Furthermore, the VPI mole- _ packing of VP1 pentamers in both pentameric and hexa-

cules present in adjacent pentamers in the simian virus 40 cap- meric arrays requires different contacts among these struc-
sid do not make extensive contacts via the surfaces of their tural units. In fact, there are just three kinds of interpentamer
B-barrel domains. Rather, stable interactions among pen- contact, which are the result of alternative conformations and

tamers are mediated by their N- and C-terminal arms. The _noncovalent interactions of the long C-terminal arms of VP1
