ularly in the towers that rise above the hexon base and are
formed by intertwining loops from each monomer. Conse-
quently, the trimeric hexon is extremely stable.

‘The adenovirus particle contains seven additional struc-
tural proteins (Fig. 4.15A). The presence of so many proteins
and the large size of the particle made elucidation of adenovi-
rus architecture a challenging problem. One approach that
has proved generally useful in the study of larger viruses is
the isolation and characterization of discrete subviral parti-
cles. For example, adenovirus particles can be dissociated
into a core structure that contains the DNA genome, groups
of nine hexons, and pentons. Analysis of the composition of
such subassemblies identified two classes of proteins in addi-
tion to the major capsid proteins described above. One com-
prises the proteins present in the core, such as protein VII,
the major DNA-binding protein. The remaining proteins are
associated with either individual hexons or the groups of
hexons that form an icosahedral face of the capsid, suggest-
ing that they stabilize the structure.

‘The interactions of protein IX and other minor proteins with
hexons and/or pentons were deduced initially by difference im-
aging (Fig. 4.5) and refined subsequently by X-ray crystallogra-
phy and cryo-EM (Fig. 4.16A). The minor capsid proteins make
numerous contacts with the major structural units. For exam-
ple, on the outer surface of the capsid, a network formed by ex-
tensive interactions among the extended molecules of protein
IX knit together the hexons that form the groups of nine (Fig.
4,16B). The function of protein IX as capsid “cement” has been
confirmed by the much-reduced heat stability of altered parti-
cles that lack this protein. Other minor capsid proteins are re-
stricted to the inner surface, where they reinforce the groups of
nine hexons and their associations, or weld the penton base to
its surrounding hexons. Not surprisingly, such protein “glues”
also buttress other larger icosahedral structures, such as the
herpes simplex virus nucleocapsid and the capsids of much
larger viruses, such as Paramecium bursaria chlorella virus 1
(some 190 nm in diameter). During adenovirus assembly, inter-
actions among hexons and other major structural proteins must
be relatively weak, so that incorrect associations can be reversed
and corrected. However, the assembled particle must be stable
enough to survive passage from one host to another. It has been
proposed that the incorporation of stabilizing proteins like pro-
tein IX allows these paradoxical requirements to be met.

Reoviruses. Reovirus particles exhibit an unusual archi-
tecture: they contain multiple protein shells. They are naked
particles, 70 to 90 nm in diameter with an outer T = 13 icosa-
hedral protein coat that contains the 10 to 12 segments of the
double-stranded genome and the enzymatic machinery to
synthesize viral mRNA. The particles of human reovirus (ge-
nus Orthoreovirinae contain eight proteins organized in two
concentric shells, with spikes projecting from the inner layer

 

Structure 109

HM 440A
yy 410A
[i 380A
HN 350A
HE 320A

 

Interior view

Exterior view

Figure 4.16 Interactions among major and minor proteins of
the adenoviral capsid. (A) Cryo-EM reconstruction of the adenovi-
rus type 5 capsid at 3.6-A resolution radially colored by distance from
the center, as indicated. This view is centered on a threefold axis of ico-
sahedral symmetry. Only short stubs of the fibers are evident, as these
structures are bent. For other views, see Movie 4.2 (http://bit.ly/Virology__
ADS5Cap). Courtesy of V. Reddy, The Scripps Research Institute. (B)
Views of the outer (left) and inner (right) surfaces indicating the loca-
tions of the minor capsid proteins IX, Illa, V, VI, and VIII (colored as
in Fig. 4.15A) with respect to hexons (gray) and penton base (magenta).
Data from Yu Y et al. 2017. Sci Adv 3:e1602670.

through and beyond the outer layer at each of the 12 vertices
(Fig. 4.17A). Members of the genus Rotavirus, which includes
the leading causes of severe infantile gastroenteritis in hu-
mans, contain three nested protein layers, with 60 projecting
spikes (Fig. 4.17B). Although differing in architectural detail,
reovirus particles have common structural features, includ-
ing an unusual design of the innermost protein shell.
Removal of the outermost protein layer, a process thought to
occur during entry into a host cell, yields an inner core struc-
ture, comprising one shell (orthoreoviruses) or two (rotaviruses
and members of the genus Orbivirus, such as bluetongue virus).
