Structural Organization at
unit fivefold axes

A

x60

g
®
&

a

x60 x12
x60 x12

Structure 101

Capsid Total number
of subunits
(607)
QB °
T=1
180
T=3

 

T=13

Figure 4.10 The principle of triangulation: formation of large capsids with icosahedral symmetry. The formation of faces of icosahe-
dral particles by triangulation is illustrated by comparison of structural units, organization of structural units at fivefold axes of icosahedral sym-
metry, and in capsids with the T number indicated below. In each case, the protein subunits are represented by trapezoids, with those that interact
at the vertices colored purple and all others tan. It is important to appreciate that protein subunits are not, in fact, flat, as shown here for simplicity,
but highly structured (see, for examples, Fig. 4.1] and 4.13). The interaction of subunits around the fivefold axes of symmetry and the capsid, with an
individual face outlined in red, are shown for each value of T, to illustrate the increase in face and particle size with increasing T.

Quasiequivalence. A second cornerstone of the theory
developed by Caspar and Klug was the proposition that when
a capsid contains >60 subunits, each occupies a quasiequiva-
lent position; that is, the noncovalent bonding properties of
subunits in different structural environments are similar,
but not identical. This property is illustrated in Fig. 4.9C for a
particle with 180 identical subunits. In the small, 60-subunit
structure, 5 subunits make fivefold symmetric contact at each
of the 12 vertices (Fig. 4.9B). In the larger assembly with 180
subunits, this arrangement is retained at the 12 vertices, but

the additional subunits are interposed to form clusters with
sixfold symmetry (hexamers). In such a capsid, each subunit
can be present in one of three different structural environ-
ments (designated A, B, or C in Fig. 4.9C). Nevertheless, all
subunits bond to their neighbors in similar (quasiequiv-
alent) ways, for example, via head-to-head and tail-to-tail
interactions.

Capsid architectures corresponding to various values of T,
some very large, have been reported. The triangulation num-
ber and quasiequivalent bonding among subunits describe
